So, ladies and gentlemen, we move on
to the study of macroeconomics.
See topic 5 on the slide.
Macroeconomic aggregates are
a large domestic product.
Well, let's first remember
again what macroeconomics actually studies.
Microeconomics – what is it studying?
The behavior of individual economic
agents and their interaction in individual
markets.
Macroeconomics studies the
economy as a whole.
And the most important methodological
feature of macroeconomics
is aggregation, that is, generalization.
The macroeconomic view of the
national economy distinguishes four
generalized economic subjects.
This, look at the slide, first
of all, households.
These are all private economic
units within the country whose
activities are aimed
at meeting their own needs.
Further, macroeconomics distinguishes
the entrepreneurial sector, that
is, the whole set of firms
registered within the country.
The next macroeconomic aggregate
is the public sector.
It includes all state institutions
and institutions of the country.
And finally, the fourth aggregate is
the overseas.
Foreign includes all economic
entities – both households,
firms, and foreign states,
that is, all entities
that have a permanent location
outside the country.
That is, four large
aggregated economic agents
operate in the macroeconomy
– households, firms, the
state, abroad.
Macroeconomic aggregation
extends to markets.
The macroeconomic view distinguishes
four aggregated markets.
It is the commodity market, labour market,
money market and securities market.
Note that in macroeconomics
there is no market for
separate goods, separate
goods.
There is no oil market, wheat
market, or gold market.
In macroeconomics, there is a single market
that unites all the benefits.
In this market, the total
volume, the total volume, the national
production, the social production,
the domestic product
are sold and bought.
Let's talk about the domestic product.
The domestic product is the
market value of all
goods and services intended
for final consumption
and produced in the country
over a certain period
of time.
If, to imagine a domestic
product, it is best to imagine
the economy in the form of a
giant supermarket.
This supermarket exhibits all goods
and services produced over a certain
period of time in the territory
of the country.
All goods and services are intended
for final consumption.
Here in this corner, for example, nuclear
submarines, in this corner, bakeries,
there costumes, here cars, there
are the services of doctors, teachers
and artists.
The whole set of goods and services
intended for final consumption
forms the domestic
product.
I want to draw your attention to the fact
that the domestic product includes
cars, but does not include steel, does
not include metal, which went to
the production of cars.
The domestic product of the
wool consists of goods
intended for final consumption.
Products intended for intermediate
consumption are not included
in the wool domestic product.
There are cars, but no
metal.
Dresses are included, but no wool is included,
no fabric is included.
Includes gasoline if it
is sold if it is sold to car enthusiasts.
It is considered the final product.
But the price of oil in the domestic
product is not included.
Oil is the raw material for the production of gasoline.
Gasoline is in, but there is no oil.
The only necessary reservation.
The price of oil is taken into
account when calculating the
domestic product if oil goes
for export.
Oil is the final product
of our economy.
The problem now is how to measure
GDP – the domestic product.
There are three ways to measure GDP.
To better understand these ways, let'
s go back to my conditional example
with the supermarket.
This conditional supermarket
exhibits all goods and services
intended for final consumption
and produced in the
country.
How can we find out the value of this
total GDP?
Well, the easiest way is to circumvent
all the shelves, rewrite
prices, multiply by volumes,
and then fold.
This means that we measure
GDP by cost of production
or production methods.
See, the first way to
measure GDP by cost of production.
How can we measure?
We assume that if a product is
produced, it will be bought by someone
else.
If a product is produced but not yet purchased,
here is a small statistical
nuance of its accounting when calculating
GDP.
But let's first assume that everything
that is produced is bought by someone.
How can we measure
GDP?
You can, conditionally speaking, after
the end of the trading day to remove the cash.
If a product is purchased by someone,
the value of the product
is equal to the sum of the
costs of all consumers.
The second way to measure GDP is
by the sum of all consumer expenses.
This method of measuring
GDP is called the end-use method.
The third method is based on the
sum of primary income or the sum of the
income of all the participants in production.
This is called the
distribution method.
What is this method based on?
It is based on the fact that
if consumers paid some amount of
money, the product they bought,
that money did not disappear.
They became the income of those who participated
in the production process.
Well, look, let's give an example
so that you can, maybe, better
understand it.
You bought this audio course.
It is printed in a 100 copy printing.
Each copy, let's say, costs
100 rubles.
How can this rate contribute to
the GDP of Russia?
Can be calculated how.
10 copies or 100 copies.
Each copy costs 100 rubles.
This is the final product.
The cost, cost, total cost
is 10 thousand rubles.
This is the first way.
GDP is measured by production method.
and further.
Someone bought this course.
Can I do anything?
Put all the costs, all buyers
on this, to purchase this
course.
It will be the same 10,000 rubles.
And then what?
If you paid for this course,
someone got that money.
Who was who got?
For example, I am.
Who else?
All those who have participated
in this course.
So your course expenses
turned into what?
The income of those who participated in its creation.
Here it turns out that GDP can be measured
once again in the patria in three ways.
The first way how?
by cost of production.
The second is the total cost of all consumers.
The third method, by the sum of the
income of all producers involved in its
creation, in the creation of this product.
If we use all three methods correctly,
they should give the same
result.
In this painting I tried to
paint the same thing, paint
the same thing.
What is in the center?
The domestic product.
This is the value of all final
goods and services produced
in the country.
What is on the left?
expenses of all consumers.
In macroeconomics, we distinguish
four main groups of consumers.
Who buys our goods?
Who is, in our case, in the
rows in our supermarket?
Who is on one side?
households buying goods
for personal use.
Who is on the other side?
Companies that buy goods for
production consumption.
End products for production
consumption are machines,
machines, equipment,
buildings, structures.
The cost will also be included in GDP.
Who else is in our supermarket?
State officials.
They buy goods
for the state.
And finally, the last group
of buyers, who are you, see below?
The Foreigners.
Foreigners we buy and understand everyone.
Foreign firms, foreign
governments, and foreign
households.
Is the value of GDP
equal to what?
Costs of all consumers.
I repeat, states, households,
firms and foreigners.
What happens next?
The arrows are right in the revenue direction.
This means that the expenses of some
have become the income of others.
When the GDP is sold, who gets
their share?
Employees in the form of pay.
Capitalists receive a percentage on the
invested capital.
Shareholders receive dividends.
Land owners receive rent.
Entrepreneurs are making profits.
These are the main types of income.
This figure is intended
to make it clear that the sum,
the cost of production, is
equal to the sum of costs.
What is produced, who is bought.
The expenses are turned into whose income.
We see here the four main groups
of buyers and the main types
of income in the market economy.
Now here is an important nuance.
In the 92nd year, Russia'
s GDP was about 640 billion rubles.
By 2007, it would be
more than 27 trillion rubles.
Does this mean that GDP has grown somewhere
47 times over that period?
What is the real social production
increased by 47 times?
Absolutely not.
GDP cannot be measured in pieces,
in tons, in meters of
vehicles.
GDP can be measured in rubles.
The tables are different.
They can be brought to a single
denominator only by means of
a ruble measurement.
And if so, the size of GDP is influenced,
on the one hand, by the change in the
physical volumes of products produced,
and on the other hand by the change
in prices.
There is a distinction between
nominal and real GDP.
We read the definition on the slide.
Nominal GDP is GDP calculated
in current prices.
And when I say that Russia's
GDP in 1992 was 640 billion
rubles, and now it will soon
exceed 27 trillion rubles,
I am speaking precisely of
a change in nominal GDP.
Why is nominal GDP changing?
influenced by two factors.
The first factor is the change
in physical production volumes.
The second factor is price change.
And if we do not want to take into account
the change in prices, we want
to level the change in prices, we want
to take into account only the change
in production volumes?
We have to calculate
real GDP.
We read.
Real GDP is GDP calculated
in constant prices, for which
prices of a certain
base year are taken.
Well, let's get to understand this
better, again, let's go back to our example
with a conditional supermarket.
Come to this supermarket in which
year, I repeat again, here are
all the final goods and services
produced in the country for
the year.
Look in that corner.
In this corner, let's say, there
are nuclear submarines.
Two nuclear submarines each
cost a billion rubles.
In this corner, let's say, 100
million baked beets.
Each cake costs 10 rubles.
In this corner of the costume,
there are cars, there are services and
so on and so on.
What can we do?
We can multiply the prices by the volume
of all the different goods, then put together
the result, and what will we get?
GDP measured in current prices.
at this year's prices.
I'll go to the supermarket
next year.
What will change?
On the one hand, the production volume will
change, on the other hand, the prices
will change.
What do we see in this corner?
There were two nuclear submarines,
each costing a billion, now
let's say one nuclear submarine
costs a billion and
a half.
In this corner, there were
100 million baked beets worth
10 rubles each, and now 200
million baked beets worth 15
rubles each.
What can we do?
Again, we will multiply the volumes
by prices, put together the results and
eventually get the GDP already calculated
in new prices, in new year prices.
Again, we will get nominal GDP already
at new prices, at new year's prices.
Why has it changed compared to
last year?
A. the
The price has changed, B.
The volume of production has changed.
And I want to exclude the change
in prices, to see how the change
in production only affected GDP.
What would you advise me?
You can take new volumes of the production
of different goods and services and multiply
by the old prices.
It is estimated how much the
GDP would cost if prices remained unchanged.
As a result, we got what?
Real GDP or GDP measured in
base year prices.
What year is the base?
It depends on the goals.
If we want to see how the real
GDP has changed since the start
of market reforms, the base year
must be taken 91th year.
Reforms began in the year 92.
If we want to see how the GDP changed
in the new millennium, we need
to take the 2000s as the base.
Now let's fix this with a simple
conditional example.
Suppose that there is only
one product in the economy
– baked beef.
Let in a certain base year 100
pancakes were produced, and
each sold for 1 ruble.
In the reporting year, 50 pancakes
were produced, each being sold for 4
rubles.
Let's fill the table together.
Nominal GDP and real GDP.
This is a base year, this is a report year.
Try to fill.
What was the nominal GDP in the
base year?
How much he made?
How many baked?
100 is
Each was sold for rubles.
The nominal GDP was 100
rubles.
What is the nominal GDP in the reporting
year?
How much produced?
50 cups of cake.
Each is sold for 4 rubles.
The nominal GDP in current prices
in the reporting year is 200 rubles.
What is the real GDP in the base year?
In the base year, nominal
and real GDP must coincide.
Because prices have not changed yet.
The real GDP in the
base year is 100 rubles.
How do you calculate real GDP
in the year?
What should be done?
The new volume of the issue must be multiplied
by the old price.
It is 50 rubles.
What are we watching?
Nominal GDP increased twice in the
reporting year compared to the
base year.
Real GDP has fallen twice.
This is a childhood example.
And so clearly, real GDP has fallen.
Why clear?
We have a single-products economy.
Accordingly, we see that the
baking was 100, became 50.
Production has dropped by half.
When we have a single-product
economy, we can measure output in
pieces.
But when we have a lot of goods,
we can measure both nominal and
real GDP only in rubles.
And we see that in rubles real GDP
was 100, and became 50.
He fell exactly twice.
Now look at.
The relationship between nominal
and real GDP can be described
by formulas.
Look at the slide.
The first formula.
Nominal GDP is equal to real GDP
multiplied by the price index.
Let's test this formula on our
simple numbers.
What is the nominal GDP in the reporting
year?
200 rubles
What is the real GDP of the reporting year?
50 rubles
What is the price index?
The index is a factor
that shows how many times
the indicator changed in
the new year compared
to the base year.
How much did the cake cost?
The ruble.
How much is it now?
4 of rubles.
What is the price index?
The price of the bullets increased 4 times, meaning
the price index is equal to 4.
All coincided.
Nominal GDP is equal to real GDP
multiplied by the price index.
And the second formula that can be used.
The nominal GDP index is equal to
the real GDP index multiplied by the
price index.
Check the formula.
What is the nominal GDP index?
It was 100 rubles.
Is it equal to what?
The word is 100 rubles.
The nominal GDP index, the new indicator
divided by the old indicator
is equal to 2.
What is the real GDP index?
How much was real GDP?
100 now 50.
Divide the new indicator by the old,
we get the real GDP index.
0 to 5.
The price index is 4.
Everything goes together again.
And now let's think about how
we can use this theory to analyze
how the real GDP changes
in the Russian economy.
The State Statistics Service publishes
data on the change in nominal GDP by year.
What can we do?
Let's say we are interested in how
much real GDP grew or fell in 2007.
We have to wait for nominal
GDP data in 2006 and 2007.
Divide the nominal GDP of 2007 by
the nominal GDP of 2006.
What will we get?
The nominal GDP index.
Then we need to find data on price
changes for this year.
The price index used to link
nominal and real GDP
is called the deflator
of GDP.
If we find a deflator of GDP, what
can we do?
The nominal GDP index is divided by
this price index or deflator of GDP.
This is the real GDP
index.
Suppose it was 1.07.
What does this mean?
That real GDP for 2007 increased
by 1.07 times or 7%.
In addition to GDP, there are a
number of macroeconomic indicators.
Let us talk about them.
First of all, we distinguish between
the domestic product and the
national income.
Look at the slide.
GDP is the product produced in
the country by both residents
and non-residents.
Residents are considered persons, not
necessarily citizens of a country, but
those who have, as they say, the center
of economic interest in the territory
of that country.
You can not be a citizen, but a resident.
GNI (Bill National Income) is the sum of
primary income received by residents
of a given country as a result of
their participation in the creation of
GDP of that country, as well as GDP of
other countries.
Let us give an example.
Let's say that Russians work abroad.
They are therefore involved in creating the GDP
of other countries.
But by participating in its creation,
they get some income.
Their income is the income of Russian
residents, although received abroad.
Their income is part of the
Russian national income.
On the other hand, if, say, an American
resident works in Russia, he participates
in the creation of Russia'
s GDP.
The income will be included in the GDP
of Russia.
But at the same time, it is the income
of the American resident, so it will enter
the VAT, the wave of the national
income of the United States.
Look at the slide formula.
GNI is equal to the national
income, GDP plus the balance
of primary income received from
abroad or transferred abroad.
Let us take a look at this example
with you.
Let the foreigners not participate
in the Russian economy by their
labor, their capital, or anything.
Russians work abroad.
The GDP of Russia was 100
rubles.
In addition, the Russians earned
10 rubles abroad.
GDP is 100.
In addition to the income received by Russians
abroad, there are 10 more.
The GNV is 110.
GDP, the largest institutional income
of Russia, exceeded its GDP.
The reverse example.
Suppose the Russians are not
in any way involved in creating
foreign GDP.
Foreigners are contributing
their capital to the Russian GDP.
GDP of Russia is 100 rubles.
But, let's say, of these 100 rubles,
5 rubles is the income
of foreign residents.
Therefore, in order to calculate the GNI of
Russia, these 5 rubles must be deducted from the GDP.
100 rubles of the total GDP of Russia, including
5 rubles, is the contribution of
foreigners to the creation of our GDP.
The gross national income of Russia,
the Russians, is 95.
And if there are both, that is, we are
participating in creating
foreign GDP, foreigners are
participating in creating our GDP,
what should we do?
It is necessary to add to GDP the
balance of income received from abroad
and transferred abroad.
100 plus 10 minus 5.
Our GDP is 100 and our GNI is 105.
In general, GDP and GNI
differ little.
Well, on the one hand, we participate
in creating foreign GDP, foreigners
participate in creating
our GDP.
Approximately one is paying.
Well usually.
There is an exception.
For example, in many post-Soviet republics
of the CIS, the national
income is significantly higher
than their GDP.
Why is?
Because they, many of the
residents of these republics,
work in Russia.
Their income is included in the GDP of Russia,
but in the GNI of their republics, whose
residents they are.
And the last macroeconomic
indicator that I would like to stop at.
This is the national disposable
income.
Look at the slide.
It is considered to be the sum
of the current national income and the
balance of current transfers.
What are transfers?
These are unpaid payments,
unpaid receipts.
The balance of current transfers
means that we send, for
example, humanitarian aid or transfers
free of charge to other countries.
So the money is leaving the country.
Foreigners are helping
us.
The GNI of Russia was 105
rubles.
We just counted.
We received from abroad
free aid, suppose, for 3
rubles.
And sent abroad free assistance,
in the form of all kinds
of transfers, relatives,
for example.
4 of rubles.
So it succeeded.
Saldo minus one.
The gross national
income is 104 rubles.
So I need what?
To the CIS to add the free
receipts overseas and deduct
what we send overseas free of charge.
In the end, the gross national
disposable income is divided
into national final
consumption and national
savings.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, let'
s start our next topic.
Total demand, total supply
and macroeconomic problems.
But first I would like to express
a scarce hope that you still remember
the topic of demand and offer
from the course of microeconomics.
Well, let's all — so we'll try to
quickly remember something.
We had such a simple model.
What did X postpone?
quantity of the goods.
How did we measure the quantity of goods?
in physical units.
Maybe in pieces, maybe in tons,
maybe in meters, in purses,
in anything.
in physical units.
What have we put off on the axis?
price of this goods.
What did we measure?
In currency, in rubles.
We had a demand function.
This is such.
Demand and Demand.
It was a function of proposal.
Swept the proposals.
What allowed us to define this model?
We could find out the balance price
of this product by this model.
and its balance in the market.
In the microeconomics, it was
a market for individual goods.
In macroeconomics, if you remember,
there are no individual products.
Here we unite all the markets
of individual goods into a single common
aggregate market, where all goods
and services are sold and purchased.
Therefore, here on the axis
X we are no longer laying off
the quantity of the individual
commodity, but the total volume
of social production.
But again, if you remember,
there is a nominal GDP and
a real GDP.
So when we build the model
of total demand, total supply
on the X-axis, we
postpone the real GDP.
It is marked by the letter Y.
This is real GDP.
What can it be measured?
Of course, only in rubles, only
in monetary units.
Because in macroeconomics, cars cannot
be summed up with chocolate.
Only money is the common measure of
the whole volume of production.
Therefore, here we repeat again,
we postpone the real GDP measured
in rubles.
What have we repeated before, postponed
on the axis Y?
The price of this product in rubles.
This is not possible in macroeconomics.
There is no separate product.
And here you can't sum up the price of
a car with the price of chocolate.
Here we put the overall price
level in relative units or price
index on the Y axis.
How to understand?
Also indicated p.
But it is not the price in rubles.
This is a price level or price index.
Again, how to understand?
We are the price of a year, what level
of prices we take for the unit.
So, the number 2 what does it mean now?
Prices have doubled.
Number 3 is that prices have tripled.
So I repeat again.
Previously there were rubles, now
there are price indices.
On the axis x, I repeat, real GDP in
rubles.
After this preamble, we can
actually begin to consider
the first question of this topic.
Please look at the slide.
Here are the topics of the topic
on this slide.
The first question is the overall demand
and its factors.
The first question is the
overall demand and its factors.
First, the definition of total demand.
It is very simple.
Look at the slide.
Total demand is the real GDP that
all buyers are willing to purchase
during a given time at
different price levels.
And, as you can remember, there
was a law of demand in the microeconomy.
How did it sound simplified?
The cheaper the goods, the more
equals will want to buy.
The law of total demand
is similar.
Please see the wording
of the law on the slide.
The law of total demand.
The lower the price level in the economy,
the greater the demand of all
consumers for real GDP.
In other words, if all goods, if
the price level as a whole
is lower, then all goods as a
whole, consumers are willing
to buy more.
Here we see the overall demand
function on the chart.
You see, it has a negative tilt,
which corresponds to the formulation
of the law of aggregate demand.
The lower the price level, the greater
the total demand.
How does it derive this function
of aggregate demand?
It can be derived from the quantitative
theory of money.
Look at the next slide, this is
the equation.
Multiply by p is equal to multiply
by y.
m is the amount of money in the economy.
The rate of circulation of money is,
in other words, how many times during
a certain time each ruble passes from
hand to hand or in how many transactions
it participates.
Well, p you know, we have already
said p is the overall price level in
the economy.
and real GDP.
This is not actually an equation.
It is identity.
If one variable changes,
the other or two,
or all three, must
change.
How can this identity be justified?
Equation from the quantitative theory
of money.
Multiply by p is equal to multiply
by y.
I will try to explain it on the simplest
example.
Well, let's the most primitive
situation, we have a single-products economy.
Only one product is produced.
Let the baked.
Suppose it is printed,
say, 100 rubles.
That is, in the economy, it turns,
goes from hand to hand 100 rubles.
M is 100.
Let us also assume that every ruble
passes from hand to hand for a certain
period of time, let it be a year,
conditionally, 5 times.
Let us also assume that everything was
produced during this time.
Let's say 50 cakes.
In this case, each piece
of cake should cost 10 rubles.
Now let's think about
what will change if, say,
more money is printed.
Instead of 100 rubles, print 200.
What can change?
There may be different options.
For example, it may be that the baked
beans are traveling.
So, how much will each
cake cost?
Not 10 but 20 rubles.
But the baked bread may not travel.
In the event that the growth of the money
mass will correspond to the growth of the
release of these pancakes, that is,
the parameter Y will change, not the
parameter P.
And finally, the baked beans may not
be more expensive, even if their
quantity, the volume of production will
remain the same.
But then what is needed?
The speed of money circulation slowed.
And so always.
If one parameter changes,
the other will change, or two
others, or all three others.
Please look at the slide
again.
Here it is written, rewriting
this equation, we get equal m multiplied
by v divided by p.
This is the equation
of total demand.
What does it show?
That with these values m and v together
with the rise of p, that is, the level of
prices, y will necessarily decrease.
That is, the higher the price
level, the less the demand of all
consumers for real GDP is.
Again, if you remember the supply
demand model in microeconomics,
it was said that the demand function
can shift to the right or
to the left.
The same goes for macroeconomics.
The aggregate demand function can also
shift to the right or to the left.
What does it mean if it moved to the right?
Look at the slide, please.
This means that at the same price
level, all consumers want to buy
more of all goods and services
than before.
On the contrary, if the combined demand
function shifts to the left,
it means that at the same price
level consumers want to buy all
the goods less than before.
The demand for real GDP is decreasing.
And now the main question
to be answered is why the aggregate
demand can still increase, that
is, the aggregate demand curve
is shifting to the right, or it
can decrease and the aggregate
demand curve can shift to
the left.
Please look at the previous
slide.
The previous slide.
As I said before, the total
demand is divided into four
components.
Four components of.
In macroeconomics, we divide all
consumers into four groups.
Not by gender, not by age, not by
income, but by the peculiarities of
their consumer behavior.
In this regard, we distinguish four
groups of consumers.
The first group of consumers
are households, families, individuals.
The second group of consumers are companies.
The third group is the state.
The fourth group is foreigners.
Accordingly, the total demand, read
on the slide, is broken down into,
first, the costs of private
consumers, marked by the letter C.
Consumption is consumer expenses.
On the other hand, companies, if
you remember, buy machines, machines,
equipment, and so on.
This is called investment
demand.
The second part of the total
demand is the investment
costs of the companies.
The third is the expenses of the state.
The fourth part is foreign
expense or net export.
And if you look at the aggregate demand
from this perspective, the equation
of aggregate demand takes
shape.
Look at the slide.
Y is C plus I plus G plus X N.
What comes from here?
The increase of any of these
components of aggregate demand at a given
price level leads to the fact that the
curve A and D, the curve of
aggregate demand, shifts to the right.
And the opposite.
The decrease of any of these components
of the aggregate demand at the same time,
at the unchanged level of prices, entails
a shift of the aggregate demand
curve to the left.
That is, the overall demand is decreasing.
Well, this is actually shown on the slide,
which you have already looked at a little
earlier.
We can see it again,
on the same slide.
Curve A, D can shift to the right or to
the left.
The question that we
must answer is the following.
Why, in fact, can the consumer
demand of households, or the investment
demand of firms, or
the expenses of the state,
or the expenses of foreigners change?
What factors are these components dependent on?
That is what we will talk about now.
See the next slide.
We read.
Consumer demand of households
depends mainly on the first
factor of the total income
of all consumers, or national
income.
From accumulated wealth, from
the size of consumer
debt, consumer expectations,
taxes, transfers,
interest rate.
Well, let's talk about some
of these factors a little.
Well look at.
Suppose the national income has increased.
Consumer income has increased.
What does that mean?
That if you become richer, then at
the same price level, you will
buy different goods and services in
general more.
Your expenses will increase and the curve of the
hell will shift to the right.
Now, let's talk about the fourth
factor, consumer expectations.
Remember, we talked about expectations,
again, in the microeconomy, in the
model of supply and demand.
What expectations were there?
If you remember, about the expectations
of price changes of goods.
That is, if people expect that the
product will be more expensive,
they will buy it at the same price, usually
at the current price.
In macroeconomics, we also talk about
expectations, but still most often about
expectations of changes in consumer income.
Imagine such a situation.
Don't give God you expect your income
to be reduced soon.
Your company is going through difficult times.
Maybe you will even be fired.
Today, your income has not changed,
but your expectations for income in
the future are unfavorable.
How will this affect your consumer
behavior today?
You will probably save.
You will put more money off on a
black day.
In other words, you will
save most of your income.
Your expenses will decrease.
The curve of hell will then
move to the left.
If everyone thinks so.
All consumers think that there
are tough times ahead.
Let's look at the last factor.
The interest rate.
This factor plays an increasingly
important role.
Why is?
A significant share of our purchases are already
made in credit in Russia.
Accordingly, if the interest rate
is high, then we will most likely
take less money out of loan.
So less and spend.
That is, at a high interest
rate, the household's consumer
expenses will be less.
And lowly the opposite.
More details about these factors
are discussed in the texts of the lectures.
And we will go on.
Now the next slide,
please look.
It is devoted to investment demand
or investment costs of firms.
What depends on investment demand?
From the real interest rate
outlined, look at the slide,
the national income, expected
investment profits, taxes paid
by companies and received
on behalf of grants.
Let us talk about how these factors affect.
But above all, here I would like
to emphasize that in macroeconomics
we share the nominal interest
rate and the real interest rate.
The nominal interest rate, look
at the slide, is the rate at
which a loan agreement is
concluded, at which
funds are borrowed on the financial
markets.
The real interest rate is a change
in the purchasing power
of interest income.
The relationship between nominal and
real interest rates is determined
by the Fisher equation.
It's very simple, look at the slide.
The real interest rate is equal to the
nominal interest rate minus the
rate of inflation.
Let us give the simplest example.
The loan contract is under 10% of the annual.
This is the nominal interest rate.
At the same time, during the year, prices
increased by 4%.
I think we will come to a situation
when we have inflation
not above 4% a year.
This is still considered to be a
lot of the standards of developed economies.
Well well well.
Let it be 4%.
What does this mean?
10% minus 4%.
The real interest rate is 6%.
This is the percentage that the lender
actually receives from the money
borrowed.
Dependence is not difficult.
The lower the real interest rate,
the higher the investment costs of the
companies.
Please look at the slide.
At high interest rates, firms
will borrow little money in
banks and, accordingly,
invest, buy new equipment
will also be for small
amounts.
At low interest rates, firms
borrow more and their investment
costs increase due to the growth
of borrowing funds.
Return to the previous slide.
Even one slide back,
let's go.
What else depends on the investment demand
of companies?
of national income.
How to understand?
Why so?
Imagine that the national income
has increased.
All consumers' incomes have increased.
They started spending more.
So the demand for the products of the companies has increased.
First, companies are trying
to meet this demand by means of
active production in capacities.
But sooner or later, with the expansion
of demand, they will have to increase
their production capacity.
That is, to buy new equipment,
to buy new buildings,
structures.
That is, to make
investment costs.
The higher the national income, the
higher the investment costs of the
companies.
Expected return on investment.
The third factor.
He is also very important.
Why do companies make
investment expenses?
in terms of future profits.
And there are expectations of future
profits for firms favorable, they
will invest more with other equal.
Consequently, investment costs
are increasing.
The overall demand is growing.
By the way, these dependencies
are often used by the government
to conduct economic policy.
Well, imagine the country's economy is
experiencing a decline or stagnation.
This was relatively recently,
for example, in Japan.
Economic growth has fallen to almost
zero.
Or at some times, at some years, I
think it was even negative, there
was a decline in the Japanese
economy.
What did the government and monetary authorities
of Japan try to do?
They tried to lower interest
rates.
Why Why?
To encourage consumers
and to spend more
money.
Increase in demand for Japanese
products.
This is to pull the real sector out
of the crisis.
But for a long time it did not work very well.
Why is?
Because even despite very low
interest rates, firms did not
want to borrow money and invest.
Their expectations for future
profits were unfavorable.
The psychological factor worked
against investment.
The same with households.
Even with low interest rates,
they didn't have to spend much.
Because their personal expectations
of future income changes
were unfavorable.
Let us now talk about the third
component of the total demand.
Demand of the State.
The state is more difficult with demand.
Or vice versa is easier.
The first two components of the aggregate
demand that we talked about
are household consumer expenses
and business investment
expenses, these are functions.
That is, we can determine what
the household company costs
depend on.
But nobody has ever managed to
build a function of public spending.
The public expenditure is largely
arbitrarily determined
under the influence of
factors not economic,
but often political.
Public spending is usually
increasing before the election.
But next year we have elections,
we can expect the government
to be scattered and the election
will increase its spending
so that we can vote for those
we need to vote for.
After the election, the government usually
starts saving.
And before the election, it doesn't really
consider money, it increases its expenses.
And that's why in macroeconomic
models, we read on the slide,
government spending is usually
present as an exogenous
or pre-determined parameter.
This parameter can be
changed.
Up and down.
The fourth component of total demand.
Please look at the
next slide.
Foreign demand or net exports?
In fact, I have said that net
exports are the difference
between exports and imports.
Foreigners buy our goods, it is
our exports.
We buy foreign goods, it is
our import.
Net export is the difference
between export and import.
It is obvious that it can be negative.
Imports exceed
exports.
Well, as you probably know, we
have in Russia net exports more
than a positive value.
Exports are much larger than imports.
Of course, the structure of exports
and imports is not always satisfying.
A significant portion of our exports
is raw materials.
Let us now talk about what factors
net exports depend on.
Please look at the slide.
It depends on three main factors.
The first factor is national income in
other countries.
Let's think about how it affects
our net exports.
Well well well.
Such an example.
Imagine that our neighbors' economies
are experiencing a decline.
How will this affect our economy?
Obviously, our exports will fall.
The poor are buying little.
On the contrary, with the rise of economies in
neighbouring countries, their income will increase.
They will buy the most of all
goods, including ours, and our
exports will increase.
Accordingly, the greater the national
income in other countries, the greater
our exports to these countries,
that is, our net exports.
It is I to the fact that we should
never be angry about the failures
in other countries of
economic failures.
We are all in the same boat.
And in the modern era
of globalization, if one economy
is sick, the big economy
is more likely to be sick for all
the other economies.
The United States is now developing
at a fair pace, its
GDP is growing.
Imagine what would happen if the
US economy were to go through a crisis.
This will hit the economies
of Europe and China first.
Why is?
Americans are the world's largest
consumer.
National income in the United States will fall.
Therefore, they will buy
less foreign goods.
Exports to the US will decrease
in other countries.
The second factor.
National income in the country.
Here is such a paradox.
Our economy is growing.
We are becoming richer.
And very often, the trade balance
or, in macroeconomic
language, the country's net
exports begin to deteriorate.
Why is?
As our income grows, we
start to buy more of all
goods, including foreign ones.
As our income grows, our
imports grow.
Accordingly, net exports at the same
level are beginning to decline
again.
Our exports depend on
national income in other countries.
And our imports from
our own national income.
This is what we see in Russia.
The country's economy has been growing continuously since
the 19th century.
And at a fairly fast pace.
What do we see at the same time?
Imports are growing at a
very rapid rate.
We are buying more
foreign goods.
And if the low, not very
favorable global climate in the
energy markets, it is possible
that our net exports would
be negative.
And the third factor.
Very, in my opinion, very interesting.
Factor of exchange rates.
I would like to talk about him a
little more detailed.
Please look at the slide.
First, the nominal exchange
rate is determined.
Read the definition.
The nominal exchange rate is the price
of the national currency
expressed in foreign currency.
In particular, the nominal
rate of the ruble today
is let us count $1.25.
Do not confuse the dollar.
The rate is 25 rubles per dollar.
The rate of the ruble is $1, 25.
For the ruble, you get $ 1, 25.
The real exchange rate is different.
This is the price ratio of goods in the
two countries.
It is calculated by formula.
Look at this formula.
The real exchange rate is equal
to the nominal exchange rate multiplied
by the price of some goods in our
country and divided by the price
of similar goods abroad.
Let's find out this formula.
So let's write this formula again.
The real exchange rate is equal
to the nominal exchange rate
multiplied by the pH divided by the
PF home price, foreign price.
The price of the goods in our country and the
price of the similar goods in the foreign country.
Well, let us understand.
We agreed that the nominal
exchange rate is 1,25
For the ruble, you get $ 1, 25.
Well, let's say that a product in
the US costs $100.
A similar product in Russia costs
1250 rubles.
What is the real exchange rate?
One and the second.
What is the economic meaning
of the result?
Think of.
We can multiply $100 by $25.
What will we get as a result?
As a result, we will get the price
of the American goods, expressed in rubles.
That is, it will happen that
the American goods in rubles will
cost 2, 5 thousand rubles.
The Russian goods cost 1250 rubles.
What comes from here?
Russian goods are twice as cheap as American.
This is the real
exchange rate.
I remind you, please look again on the
slide that the real exchange rate
is the ratio of the prices of goods
in two countries.
And here it turned out that under
this condition the price ratio
one-to-two or Russian goods are twice
as cheap as American.
But if our goods are twice as
cheap, how should it affect
our exports and imports?
Most likely, Americans will
be willing to buy our goods,
and we will not be willing
to buy similar American goods.
This product will probably
be exported.
And if the real price for another
commodity was, say, more than
one, what does that mean?
Is our product more expensive than the American analogue?
And so, with the other equals,
we will import this product.
But there are a lot of goods.
Therefore, there will
also be a lot of real exchange
rates.
For some goods, the real exchange rate is
less than one unit, for others more
than one unit.
If the actual rate is less than one unit,
then we are more likely to export these goods.
If the actual exchange rate is greater
than one unit, we will import these
goods more likely.
But we are more interested in the
dynamics of this indicator over time.
Imagine that over time
the real exchange
rate is growing.
This will mean that the conditions
for our exports are worsening, and
the conditions for our imports
are improving.
Per, to make it more clear,
let's discuss our recent
Russian economic history
with you.
In the early 90s of the last century.
Exports from Russia are unstoppable.
Why is?
For most goods, the real exchange
rate is less than one unit.
Our products are cheaper than foreign ones.
We are profitable to export
these goods.
It is not profitable to
buy imported goods.
What happened during the
90s?
Well, if you remember, the nominal rate
of the ruble against the dollar at that
time was constantly falling.
And fell pretty quickly.
Well, if anyone can remember, in the
early nineties, for a dollar was
given five rubles.
And by the time of the domination, by the
end of the ninety-seventh year, the dollar
was already more than five thousand rubles.
The ruble rate against the dollar
has fallen.
The dollar rose and the ruble fell.
Well, let's assume that prices
abroad were roughly constant.
Inflation abroad was low in those
years.
Let us assume that this variable
was, it was to show was constant.
What happened to prices in Russia?
Our prices have risen.
They grew quite quickly.
So we look.
This multiplier decreased, this
multiplier rose.
What depends on the result?
It is obvious that this
indicator has increased
or decreased.
In the 1990s, prices rose
about twice as fast as
the ruble fell.
This means that the real rate of the ruble
has risen.
In other words, our goods were
priced in relation to foreigners.
This has had a negative impact on our exports.
It is becoming increasingly difficult
for us to export our goods.
But it has had a very good impact on
our imports.
We are increasingly
importing foreign goods.
Remember your life in the early 90s.
What was in our houses?
Tempo and Rubin TVs, ZIL
refrigerators.
Where did we rest?
Probably on the Black Sea coast of the Caucasus
or in the suburb of Moscow.
End of the 90s.
All in the homes of Sony, Panasonic, Deo.
We are increasingly travelling in foreign countries
and resting in Turkey.
So what does this say?
Our imports have grown at an accelerated
rate compared to our exports.
And it was observed.
I said that in the early 90s, exports
were unstoppable.
This is a huge gap between exports
and imports.
By the year 1991, net exports
were still positive.
But the difference is minimal.
What are we watching now?
Not even not.
Let us talk about this first.
What we saw after August
98?
I will rewrite the formula.
The ruble has fallen sharply.
His course fell almost three times
in one, only a month.
The nominal rate of the ruble has fallen sharply.
Prices also increased.
But in the first half of the year
98 and in the beginning of the year
99 prices grew more slowly
than the ruble fell.
And what did it lead to?
That the trend of change of the real
course has changed to the opposite.
The real course has fallen.
Our products are again
cheaper compared to foreign.
This makes it harder for
us to sell our goods abroad.
On the contrary, foreign goods in
one night became too expensive for us.
We look at our
local producers.
The local producers took
the spirit.
All the parking spaces are
filled with unsold cars.
And suddenly one night the foreigners traveled.
And what led to what?
The car has temporarily solved
its sales problems.
In other words, by reducing our imports, we
increased our purchases of what?
Import of replacement products.
The demand for domestic
goods has increased.
But all - let's make it clear again, let's
get the outcome.
The lower the real exchange rate,
the cheaper our goods are in general
relative to foreign.
The more our exports and the
less our imports.
This means that our net exports are greater.
This is the result of the increased
demand for Russian goods.
Yes, here is something else.
What are we watching now?
The trend has changed drastically here.
Not only do we have prices
continue to rise, although at a
more copper pace than before.
But what else is happening?
The nominal rate of the ruble,
at least against the dollar,
is now also rising.
The real course has grown.
This generally has a negative
impact on our exports and is
very beneficial for our imports.
We are again travelling in foreign brands,
resting in Turkey, buying imported
clothes again, for example.
Well, I hope you understand why
Americans are making claims
to China about the Chinese
being lowering the yuan.
Why are the Chinese down the course?
This is the usual strategy
of a developing economy
–ining a low rate of national
currency.
Why is?
Because the low rate of the
national currency promotes the export of
the country and, on the contrary,
makes it difficult to import foreign
goods to this country.
That is, the low rate is a
factor in ensuring competitive advantages
of the national developing
economy.
So, we have finished considering
the combined demand curve.
But, if you think about it, the
combined demand curve itself does
not yet show what the price level
and real GDP will be in the economy.
It only says that the lower the
price level, the greater the
total demand for real GDP.
But what will be the price of GDP,
only one cannot say anything.
The overall proposal function
will be considered.
Please look at the
next slide.
Total supply is the real
GDP that all producers
are willing to produce and sell
during a given time at different
price levels.
Total demand is how much all
consumers are willing to buy,
and total supply is how much
all producers are willing to sell.
To analyze the function of aggregate
supply, we will have to distinguish
short-term and long-term periods
in macroeconomics.
A long-term period in
macroeconomics is a period
during which prices of both commodities
and resources can freely
fluctuate up or down.
Accordingly, the long-term curve
of the aggregate supply, please
look at the slide, vertically
at the level of the
potential GDP.
In other words, the behavior
of the economy in the long term
is determined by the classical model.
According to the point of view of economists
called the classics, the free market,
if not interfered, will sooner
or later result in the real
GDP becoming equal to the
potential level.
What is potential GDP?
The potential GDP is the GDP that is
attainable at the fullest possible extent
with the full use of all available resources.
I want to emphasize again.
The classics emphasized, and
this corresponds to the
observed real, that a market economy
ultimately leads to, in the
long run, that all available
resources are used at full
capacity.
The balance GDP is equal to
the potential level.
The potential GDP depends on the
amount of resources available in
the economy and on technical progress.
But the potential GDP or economic
opportunities are not dependent
on the level of prices.
Prices can be higher and lower.
And again, the economy sooner
or later comes to
potential GDP at higher or lower
prices.
This means that the long-
term summary proposition
curve is a vertical line,
as shown in the picture
you see on the slide.
The long-term function of the aggregate
offer can shift to the right
or to the left.
Imagine that the amount of resources
available in this economy
has increased over time.
Well, for example, the population increased,
capital accumulated.
Under capital, I want to emphasize
again, we understand in macroeconomics
the means of production.
In the economy more machines, machines, equipment.
Finally, there is technical progress.
This means that the potential GDP
is increasing.
And if that is the case, the long-
term summary supply curve begins
to shift to the right.
If, on the contrary, there is a regression
in the economy, the amount of resources
is reduced.
Instead of technological progress,
the regression is technical.
In this, quite rare case, the long-
term function of the aggregate
offer shifts to the left.
Now let's talk about the
short-term function of the aggregate offer.
In the short term, prices for goods and
resources are less flexible than in the long term.
Moreover, sometimes they
are unchanged.
Accordingly, the short-term
curve of the aggregate supply
can be horizontal or have
a rising slope.
A positive trend.
Please look at the slide.
What does the left schedule say?
That the level of prices in the economy is
set, and producers have the opportunity
to increase the volume of real GDP at a
given level of prices.
There would be demand for their products.
Usually, such a function,
the horizontal function of the aggregate
supply, occurs when the actual
GDP is significantly less
than the potential.
The economy is working with
a great underload.
There are a lot of unused
resources.
Figuratively speaking, mass unemployment
in the economy, factories are
stagnant, fields are not sowed.
Why does this happen?
Probably because of the low
overall demand for
domestic products.
If the overall demand increased,
it would be not difficult for manufacturers
to engage today's unemployed in
production, increase the use of
equipment, that is, without
raising prices.
That is, at the same price level,
producers could freely increase the
volume of production.
And the short-term curve of the
aggregate offer is, it turns out, horizontal.
Another case is more frequent.
Look at the right chart when
the short-term aggregate
bid curve has a positive tilt.
What does this mean?
That in a short period, producers
respond to the rise in prices by the
growth of real GDP, the growth
of real production.
That means higher prices
are encouraging producers
to produce and sell more products.
The real GDP, i.e.
the total supply from
all producers, is growing.
Remember, I said that the
long-term aggregate proposition function
can shift to the right, sometimes
to the left.
The short-term function of the aggregate
offer may shift downward, but more
often all upwards.
Why can this happen?
In fact, the short-term function
of the aggregate supply is related
to the cost of the producers per
unit of product.
Imagine that the resources have been
spent by all the companies.
What will this lead to?
That all companies will be forced
to raise their sales prices when producing
the previous volume of products.
Accordingly, the short-term curve
of the aggregate proposition, though
horizontal, though rising,
shifts to the right.
The simplest example.
Imagine that the RAU of the EU
has increased electricity tariffs.
What will this lead to?
All companies will have increased
costs on equal terms.
This means that they will have to increase
their prices at previous volume
of production.
And the short-term curve
of the total supply will go,
I repeat, up.
Now to the third question of the topic.
macroeconomic balance of the economy.
What is it?
Macroeconomic balance is
achieved when the total
demand is equal to the total supply.
Please look at the slide.
I have said that in the long run,
the total supply is aimed at
the level of the potential GDP.
Accordingly, macroeconomic balance
is achieved at the point of intersection
of the combined demand curve
and the long-term combined
supply curve.
What happens if the overall demand increases?
For example, the central bank will increase
the money mass in the economy.
Total demand will grow, but
in the long run it will only affect
prices.
The output will remain the same
and equal to the potential GDP.
Well, the short-term curve of the
aggregate offer, it does not play
an independent role here.
It simply goes through the point
of long-term macroeconomic equilibrium.
It is as if it is adjusted to the intersection
of these two functions.
The function of aggregate
demand and long-term supply curve.
In the short term, the situation is more complicated.
Please look at the slide.
Macroeconomic balance is at the
point of intersection of the curve
of aggregate demand and the
short-term curve of aggregate supply.
At the same time, the balanced
GDP may not coincide
with the potential, as
we see in the slide chart.
Please look at.
Balance GDP is defined by
the intersection of the
short-term supply and the combined
demand function.
At the same time, the balanced GDP is
less than the potential, that is, the
economy is underloaded.
Why underload?
Small total demand.
If it were more, imagine,
well, that the state could
stimulate the overall demand
with its methods.
Whatever his mind, imagine.
Total demand would increase and the
combined demand curve would
shift to the right.
And it is possible that in this
case the balanced GDP would be the same
as the potential.
Here let's take this moment
and look at it more carefully.
Next slide, please see
the change in the balance
of the economy.
Let us understand.
It only at first glance looks
like such a confusing picture.
There is really nothing complicated
in it.
See also vertical function.
Long-term function of the aggregate offer.
It goes vertically from point U1.
So what is U1?
The potential GDP.
Short-term function of the aggregate offer.
SRAs0
The total demand function AD0.
The macroeconomic balance is
achieved at the point G0.
Again, what are we watching?
The overall demand is small.
GDP is less than the
potential level.
Suppose the overall demand has
increased for some reason.
The state has tried to stimulate
the overall demand.
Maybe something else happened.
But overall demand has increased.
Accordingly, the AD curve, the aggregate
demand curve is shifting to where?
to the right.
Where is the cross now?
At the E1.
We have increased prices, the level of prices has risen.
But the balanced GDP is now equal to the potential.
The policy of stimulating
overall demand has yielded its fruits.
Total demand has increased, and the balanced
GDP has also increased.
What if the overall demand
increases?
The AD curve will then move further to the
right, already in the position of AD2.
In the short term, the point
of balance will be E2.
Well, the point of intersection
between the short-term curve of aggregate
supply and the new curve of
aggregate demand.
But what are we watching now?
We are seeing a warming economy.
The economy is overloaded.
GDP is higher than
potential.
In a short period of time, this is possible.
This means not the normal, but
the superintensive use of all
resources.
For example, a normal working day,
8 hours with a 5-day working week.
But in a short period, people can
work 10 hours, 10 hours without
weekends.
We say that the labor resources
are being used superintensively.
Some equipment is stopped
for prevention periodically.
But you can allow a situation in
which the equipment for
prevention is not stopped in a short period of time.
and so on.
This is why we have learned that the economy
is overloaded with resources.
I repeat, it is used superintensively.
GDP is more than potential.
But when the resource is used
superintensively, they become deficitary.
The prices for them are beginning to rise.
This leads to the fact that the costs of the
companies are beginning to increase.
And when the costs of the companies
per unit of product begin to increase,
the short-term function of the aggregate
supply goes up.
This is where it moved to S R
A S 1.
Where do we end up in the end?
Eventually, the balance returns
to the E3 point.
That is, the economy eventually
returns to potential
GDP, but at the highest
possible price level.
P3 in my example.
Let us go to the fourth question.
The fourth question is called the multiplier effect.
Look at the interesting
macroeconomic patterns.
Suppose, with a given level of
national income, one of the
economic agents increases its
expenses.
Well, let's say household incomes
have not changed, but they have
decided to spend more for
some reason.
Or the revenues of the firms remained
the same, but they believe
the business prospects are favorable
and decided to increase investment
costs with their current revenues,
to purchase new equipment.
The state has decided to increase
its expenses.
Or foreigners, with other equals, decided
to increase the purchase of our goods.
This means that so-called autonomous
costs have increased.
Autonomous expenses are expenses
that are made with a constant
income.
If your income has not changed, but you
have increased your expenses, it
means that your own expenses have increased.
If the company's income did not change, they
increased their expenses.
This means that the companies have carried
out autonomous expenses.
Expenditure on previous income.
Imagine this situation.
The companies increased
their investment costs by some amount.
Conditionally for 100 rubles.
But that is interesting.
Very soon we will see that
the combined demand and national
income, and real GDP, will increase
by a greater amount compared to
the initial change in autonomous
spending.
Conditionally, you have increased your expenses
by 100 rubles, and then the economy
will go through a chain reaction, which
will lead to the fact that the overall
demand of all consumers will increase
not by 100 rubles, but by a larger amount.
This is what the multiplier effect is.
Please read the definition on the
slide.
The multiplier of autonomous expenses
is a factor that shows how much
rubles the combined demand
and national income change
when autonomous expenses change
by one ruble.
Well, that is, if, say, the firms increased
their expenses by 100 rubles, and
the demand is ultimately aggregate,
this means that each ruble of autonomous
expenses led to an increase in the
aggregate demand and GDP by 5
rubles.
The multiplier is equal to 5.
So, I'll try to illustrate the effect
of the multiplier of autonomous costs
on a simple numerical example.
Well here, look at it.
Companies have increased their autonomous
expenses.
That is, the expenses of this income.
The national income did not change, but
the companies increased their expenses
with this income.
For 100 rubles.
What does it mean that companies have increased their expenses?
This means that they, for example,
ordered new equipment
for 100 rubles.
The money is spent, the equipment is delivered.
So, the combined demand and national
income increased at the beginning
by 100 rubles.
Here it is assumed that the
short-term function of the aggregate
offer is horizontal.
The growth of production is equal to the
growth of the total...
Increase in total demand.
The total demand increased by 100 rubles.
In response to the increase in demand for
100 rubles, the workers of the machinery manufacturers
produced and sold machines for this amount.
So, these 100 rubles
the engineers received
as their income.
For customers, the cost is 100 rubles.
But this cost turned into the income
of those who produced the equipment.
What did the workers do?
Well, suppose, having received
an additional income of 100 rubles,
the engineers spent part of that
income, and saved the other part.
In this simple model, we do not consider taxes.
All additional income
is divided into additional
consumption and additional savings.
The increase in consumer spending
with the increase in national income
per ruble is called the
limit tendency to consumption.
The limit tendency to consumption
is equal to the increase in
consumer expenses divided by the
increase in income.
Or it also shows how much of
their additional income people consume.
Well, let us suppose that the
limit inclination to consumption
is equal to one second delta
C on the delta Y let one second.
So, having received an additional
income of 100 rubles, the
engineers saved 50 rubles and
spent 50 rubles.
What consumer benefits
they need.
The limit of consumption
is one second.
Half of the extra income is
spent, half is saved.
So 50 rubles workers of
machinery builders spent
on consumer goods.
For example, food industry products.
What did it lead to?
The demand increased by 50 rubles.
In other words, the additional
expenses of the working machine makers
have turned into additional
income of the food industry workers.
What did the workers do with their income?
I got another 50 rubles.
We assume that the ultimate tendency
to consume is the same for
all, one second.
So, of these 50 rubles of
additional income they saved
25 rubles, and spent another
25, another 25 rubles.
So, how much has the overall
demand increased?
25 rubles more.
Who got those 25 rubles?
Employees of those industries
on the products of which the swimmers
spent their additional income.
Food industry workers.
Workers of the food industry.
What did the employees who received
this income 25 rubles?
Half of what we agreed,
saved, half spent.
So how much did the combined
demand and national income increase?
Another 12,5 rubles.
and so on.
So we have a chain.
Expenditures are converted into income.
Revenue is transformed into new expenses.
And in the end we have a decreasing
geometric progression
here, plus multi-pointness, plus zero
and equal will be two hundred.
So, the initial demand momentum
of 100 rubles resulted
in a total demand and
national income
growth of 200 rubles.
The multiplier of
autonomous costs is equal
to two.
Look at the top formula.
Multiplier is equal to what?
Delta Y is divided into Delta A.
Delta A is the initial change
of autonomous expenses.
As I said, it is 100 rubles.
In the end, the total demand
and national income increased
by 200 rubles.
So the multiplier in our example
is equal to two.
The multiplier can be calculated by the formula.
Please look at the slide.
Multiplier is equal to the unit
divided by the unit, minus
the limit inclination to consumption.
The limit inclination to consumption
in my example, as I have already
told you, is equal to what?
One second one.
One minus one second, one second
in the denominator, one divided
by one second, it turned
out to be two.
Well, knowing the multiplier, what
are we?
Can we multiply it by
the initial increase in autonomous
costs and get what?
The final increase in national
income and gross domestic
product.
Now, let's go to the last,
fifth, question of this topic.
Problems of the Russian economy.
Please look at the table
shown on the next slide.
We have years in the first line.
from 92 to 2006.
The second is real
GDP.
How is considered?
The real GDP is calculated as a percentage
of the previous year.
The previous year is considered
100.
Please see what we are watching.
It is 92 years.
What is the real GDP of 55,8?
This means that we took the GDP of
91 years for 100.
In 92 GDP was 85.5 percent
of 100.
In one year, Russia's GDP fell
by 14.5 percent.
93 years.
What can I say about him?
What do the numbers 91 and 3 mean?
We have been taking for 100 for 92 years.
The numbers 91 and 3 mean that in
93 the GDP fell by 8.7% compared
to 92 years ago.
and so on.
94 years.
What are we watching now?
The decline has intensified.
Compared to the 93 year, which
we now take for 100, the 94
year was 87.3 percent.
That is, GDP fell by 12.7 percent
in one year.
and so on.
We see that GDP has fallen up to 97
years.
In 1997, GDP was 100,9 compared
to 96 years ago.
So GDP increased by almost
1% in 97 compared to 96.
98 again falls.
The economic growth began in the 99s.
I will not talk here about the reasons
for the decline in the 90s.
From 92 to 98.
This is a normal situation,
called a transformational decline.
It was survived by all the economies
that had moved from the Soviet
administrative-command system to
the market system.
It is more interesting to see
why the Russian economy
has been growing since the 99s.
Let us remember what happened
in 98 in August 98 in the
financial crisis.
What did he lead to?
A sharp fall in the ruble.
I have already that somewhere in one
month the ruble fell, the nominal rate
of the ruble fell almost three times.
So the nominal rate of the ruble
fell, the real rate of the ruble fell,
and this led to the fact that our net
exports grew.
Well, remember, I said that when
the real rate drops, our
goods become cheaper, cheaper,
cheaper relative to foreign.
So, it is easier for us to export
our goods, and it is harder
for foreigners to import their
goods to our country.
Foreign goods are getting
too expensive for us.
But if foreign goods become
too expensive, we increase
demand for domestic import
substitute products.
So our net exports are growing.
It is a component of overall demand.
Let me try to explain it, maybe
more clearly.
Let us once again remember together
which components are divided into
the total demand.
The four components.
Consumer demand of households,
investment demand of firms,
demand of the state and demand
of foreigners, called net exports.
Net exports are the difference
between our exports
and imports.
X exports and M imports.
What happened in the
August 98 crisis?
Again, the ruble has fallen.
The nominal rate of the ruble fell, and the
real rate also fell.
So our goods have been cheaper
compared to foreign goods, or the same
thing, foreign goods have been
higher compared to our own.
This makes it easier for
us to export our products.
Our exports have grown.
On the other hand, the competitiveness
of our products in relation to
foreign products has increased.
Foreign goods are relatively expensive.
So imports have decreased.
But with the decrease of imports, imports have decreased.
This means that we have turned
our eyes on domestic
import substitute products.
We have increased our demand for it.
Thus, as a result of the increase
in exports and the fall in imports,
our net exports grew.
This is a component of the overall
demand for our products.
The overall demand has increased.
And when the overall demand increases,
what do we see on the schedule?
Please see the following slide.
Total demand increased due
to net exports.
And the curve of hell is moving where?
Right to AD1.
What did it lead to?
Prices have risen.
The price level has risen from P0 to P1.
But more important than another.
GDP is balanced.
From Y0 to Y1.
So there was economic growth.
Back to the table.
Here we see that in 99 years, the effect
of the devaluation of the ruble
increased our real GDP.
As they say, there would be no happiness,
but misfortune helped.
The financial crisis, despite all its unpleasant
consequences, has led to the fact that
Russia's GDP has started to grow.
This is due, again, to the growth
of the overall demand for our products.
Many companies that previously lie
in Baku suddenly found that demand
for their products grew.
Again, I repeat, the curve of AD has
shifted to the right and the balanced
GDP has grown.
In the second half of 1999 the
growth of GDP continued.
Look at the table.
In 2000, GDP grew by 10% compared
to 1999.
Remember, we take
100 each year.
Now the multiplier effect works.
Remember I just explained it?
The multiplier effect.
What is he expressing?
Let's, in this case.
Our net exports have increased.
Our companies have found that there
is a demand for their products.
But if demand for their products
grew, and they began to produce more
products, the incomes of those
who produce these products increased
accordingly.
Income increased, what increased?
their expenses.
Remember the multiplier effect?
Growth in expenses causes growth in
income, growth in income causes growth
in expenses.
New growth of expenses.
So what have we started to observe?
Due to the increase in incomes, consumer
expenses have increased.
The companies have seen the demand for their products
increase.
What will this demand say?
They began to expand, buy
new equipment, that is,
to make investment expenses.
So what component has increased
the overall demand?
The Investment.
So the overall demand has increased even more.
And the curve of the total demand,
see the next slide, it shifted even
more from the position of AD1,
on the previous slide we had
AD1, already in the position
of AD2.
And what have we come to?
We have come to the fact that the balanced
GDP has reached the potential level.
Look again.
Function of total demand.
She is constantly moving to the right.
It has adopted the AD2.
And now it crosses the
long-term curve of total supply
at point E2.
This means that the balanced GDP
has reached a potential level.
Let us go back to the table again.
Look at 90...
by 2002.
At the end of the year, economists
were very pessimistic.
They said the growth was out.
In 2000, GDP grew by 10%.
In 2001, GDP grew by 5.1%.
In 2002, it increased by 4.7%.
Economists have predicted that
growth will soon stop.
From what did they come?
They assumed that the balanced
GDP had already reached
the potential level.
And I explained that when
the balanced GDP reaches a
potential level, further growth in
the aggregate demand leads only
to growth in production only in
a short period of time.
In the long run, as the economy
is overloaded, prices start
to rise and the economy
returns to potential
GDP only at higher
price levels.
The year 2003 was a pessimistic year.
Look what happened.
GDP has increased.
Economists predicted that growth
would stop or be minimal, and
GDP in 2003 instead grew
by 7.3%.
What contributes?
Please look at the third line
of investment in capital.
What happened to the investments in 2003?
There was an investment boom.
Increased investment costs
of companies.
But investments in the macroeconomy
play a dual role.
On the one hand, investment is a
component of aggregate demand.
When companies make investments,
it means they order new equipment,
for example, from machinery
manufacturers.
Investment is part of
the total demand.
When the equipment is purchased
and installed, what happens as a result?
The production capacity of the companies
is increasing.
But if the production capacity of firms
grows, the potential GDP, that
is, the opportunities of firms,
increases.
So, on the one hand, investments contribute,
are a component of the aggregate
demand.
Growth in investment is an increase
in overall demand.
But on the other hand, the
growth of investments means that firms
have increased physical capital,
more means of production.
This means that the potential
GDP will increase.
This is the ideal situation.
Please look at the schedule.
We go back to the same schedule.
You see, the overall demand
continues to grow.
The curve of hell has already moved to
the position AD3.
But by increasing investment, when
equipment is installed, the potential
GDP grows.
Consequently, not only is the combined
demand curve shifting to the
right, but the long-term combined
supply curve is shifting to the right.
also also.
This is an ideal situation.
A kind of eternal engine.
On the one hand, demand is growing,
but the constant opportunities for
its satisfaction, i.e. the total
supply, are growing.
Simultaneous demand of the total demand
and the possibility of its
satisfaction, i.e. the
total supply, contributes
to the constant growth of GDP.
And now, please look at the situation
of the fourth, fifth,
sixth.
There is a fairly visible pattern here.
High investment growth rates
correspond to high real GDP
growth rates.
In the sixth year just over,
investment grew by 13.5%.
GDP has increased by almost
7%.
The key to long-term
economic growth is a good investment
climate.
There will be investments,
and they will be impossible, at
least private investment, without a good
investment climate, and there will
be sustainable economic growth.
Of course, it happens and so.
It is possible that this is a situation
where the investment climate is very good,
and private investment does not
grow so that it is significant, but
the investment can be made by the state.
It would seem that the result would be the same.
High investment and high
economic growth.
But experience shows that
this outcome is relatively
short-term, for the simple
reason that the state
is initially a bad entrepreneur.
It spends money badly.
Most often not as efficient as
the private sector does.
Public investments are usually less
efficient than private investments.
Economic growth in such conditions
is unlikely to be sustainable.
And what?
Let us talk a little bit
about inflation.
Let us go back to our
table.
Inflation means price increases.
The overall price increase.
What are we watching?
Well, at least in the 2000s,
inflation, fortunately,
has slowed down.
Why this happens?
To do this, we need to discuss
the question of what causes
inflation.
Please look at the slide.
There are three causes of inflation,
respectively, three types of inflation.
The first type of inflation.
This is inflation caused by increased demand.
Prices are rising because
the overall demand is increasing.
The curve of hell is shifting to the right.
The curve of hell moves to the right.
Graphically, how can this be shown?
The common model is the total
supply, the total demand.
The combined demand function, yes,
and the short-term combined supply function.
There is a level of P0 price
balance.
The overall demand is growing.
What happens on the schedule when
the overall demand grows?
The combined demand curve, as I have
already, is shifting to the right to the
AD1 position.
What are we watching?
Prices are starting to rise.
That is, the increase in total demand causes
price increases, that is, inflation.
Usually, this growth in total demand
is due most often to either an
increase in public spending or
to the growth of the money mass in
the economy.
The central bank prints more money, the money
mass grows, the total demand grows, the
curve of the value of the currency
moves to the right, prices start to rise.
This is the first type of inflation.
The second type of inflation, look at
the slide, is inflation caused
by rising costs.
Prices are rising because
the costs of producers are increasing.
When the cost increases, what happens?
Where is the short-term curve of
the total offer shifting?
up to.
What are we watching?
Again, the rise of prices.
This is the most unpleasant situation
in the economy.
This is called stackflation.
This is when price growth is accompanied
by a fall in GDP.
Costs for producers are increasing.
With the previous combined demand,
the balance GDP decreases.
This inflation is most often caused by
the rise in prices of the main types
of production resources.
For example, RAO Railways increased tariffs
for freight transportation.
Gazprom has raised gas prices.
The EU has raised electricity tariffs.
The costs of companies are rising, and they are
forced to raise prices in response.
There is inflation caused by the
increase in costs.
And finally, the third type of inflation
is inflation caused by inflation expectations.
Prices are rising here because both
producers and consumers expect
their growth.
Look what an interesting thing.
Expectation is a psychological factor.
In economics, psychology has
material power.
If you expect something, it will
definitely happen.
And so with inflation.
If everyone expects inflation,
prices will rise.
Why can this happen?
Well, imagine, the company
plans, makes a price list for
next year.
And it expects prices to rise
by about 10 percent next year.
He doesn't know, but he can expect.
There are certain inflationary
expectations.
What will she do?
It will definitely put its inflation
expectations in its
vacation prices.
If all companies do this, expectations
will become reality.
Prices will really rise.
That is the danger of inflation.
Inflation can be prolonged because
existing inflation generates
inflation expectations.
Inflation expectations are
contributing to new inflation.
And so it can continue for a long time.
It is difficult to fight inflation.
We need to overcome inflation expectations.
And look at.
I would like to go back to
illustrate the causes of inflation
to the equation of quantitative
money theory known to us.
That I explained in the first question
of this topic.
M, V, P and Y
Let us rewrite this equation.
This is this way.
p is equal to m, v, divided by y.
What is on the left?
The level of prices.
In the right side.
The rest is what the price level
depends on.
A change in price level is inflation.
Why can prices rise?
Please look at the equation.
Why then?
Prices can rise because of growth,
what?
Money in the economy.
The central bank printed more money than
needed.
The money mass has grown.
And with the other equals, prices start to rise.
This is a typical inflation caused by increased
demand.
Why can prices rise?
Prices may rise because real
GDP is falling.
The goods are becoming less in the
economy, and the money is still
the same.
So the former amount of money is
chased for fewer goods, and prices
are beginning to rise again.
This is inflation caused by rising costs.
Why is?
Because with the increase of costs,
production usually decreases.
Why can prices still
rise?
The speed of money circulation increases.
And this can actually be both inflation
caused by rising demand and inflation
caused by inflation
expectations.
And that expectation?
See also.
You get a salary and expect prices
to rise soon.
How will you behave?
What will you do?
You will try to get the
money you get.
Something to spend.
Do not leave them at home, otherwise
they will be dishonored.
The one who gets your money, what
will he do?
The same thing.
People will spend money faster.
The speed of money circulation will increase
and prices will start to affect.
Why is inflation slowing
down?
On the one hand, it would seem,
if you look at the statistics, the
money mass is growing in our
savings quite quickly.
But the central bank, together with
the government, is said to
be bound by excess money or, as
they say, sterilizing excess liquidity.
This will result in the
slowing of the money flow.
In addition, the factor that inhibits
inflation is the moderate increase
in tariffs of so-called
natural monopolies – Gazprom, RAO
EU, RAO RZD.
This leads to the fact that the costs of
firms are growing quite moderately, which
also does not contribute to inflation.
And finally, a very important
anti-inflationary factor is that
people have not formed any
serious inflationary expectations
in the economy.
And since inflation expectations
are low, the rate of money circulation
will also be low, which contributes
to the slowing up of price growth.
There is another very interesting question
related to monetary policy, the
connection of inflation with
the monetary policy of the Central Bank.
But we will talk about this with you
in the last topic, dealing
with modern monetary policy in Russia.
So, ladies and gentlemen, let's start
our seventh topic.
Fiscal fiscal policy.
Please look at the main issues of
the topic.
The first is the budget system of
the Russian Federation,
the state budget and its importance.
The definition is very simple.
Budget is a form of education
and spending of funds to ensure
the functions of state
authorities and local self-government.
The Russian budgetary system consists
of three levels.
The first level is the federal
budget and the budgets of state non-
budgetary funds.
The second level is the budgets of the constituent
entities of the Russian Federation and the
budgets of territorial extra-budgetary funds.
The third level is local budgets.
All of these budgets together constitute
the consolidated budget of
the Russian Federation.
In terms of how large the expenses
of the consolidated
budget can be said about the
degree of state intervention
in the economy.
Consolidated budget
spending is approximately
27.5% of GDP.
Compared to economically developed
countries, this is a rather
moderate figure.
However, for a country, which is
not yet very rich, this figure is
considered to be quite large.
What would be good would be to reduce
the share of the state in the economy a little.
The leading link in the budget
system is the state or
federal budget.
This is the basic plan for the formation
and use of the centralized monetary
fund of the state.
The federal budget, like any other,
consists of the income and expenditure
parts.
The income part of the state
budget is formed by taxes
and non-tax revenues.
The federal budget is charged
basic taxes, such as VAT, excise
duties, customs duties, mineral
mining tax and others.
The income part of the
state budget does not include
funds from the realization
of state property, as well
as loans on domestic
and foreign markets.
This is the income part.
On the other hand,
the state budget is formed,
the main most important
expenses related to priority
investment programs,
support for the most important
sectors of the economy,
social and cultural
development, defense, law
enforcement, education,
healthcare and so on.
In addition, the expenditure part
of the budget includes payments
of interest on state loans.
The payment of the main amount,
debt, in the expenditure part
of the budget is not included.
These payments are made at the
expense of new loans or
a surplus of the state
budget, if any.
The budget consists
of two main
parts.
On the one hand, it is interest
costs, that is, it is the cost
of paying interest on
government loans, and on the other
hand, non-interest or all
other costs.
Increased public spending
over income is a deficit
of the federal budget.
In contrast, excess
of government revenues over
expenditure means a surplus
of the state budget.
If the state income exceeds only
the non-procent expenses, we
are talking about the primary
profit of the state budget.
In the 1990s, the Russian
state budget was deficit.
In fact, this deficit and
the accumulated government debt
actually led to the August
98 crisis.
But in the 99th year, we
reached a small primary
surplus of the state budget
with a small overall deficit.
Since the year 2000, the
state budget has been reduced
to a surplus.
And with an increasing surplus, which is important.
Please see the following
slide.
Execution of the federal budget of
the Russian Federation in percentage
of GDP.
The first line is from the 99th
to the 6th.
The next line is income, expenditure and
deficit or surplus.
Income and expenses are
not calculated in rubles, but
in percentage of gross domestic
product.
In the year 1991, we had
a small budget deficit.
See the result?
minus 1.3% of GDP
Since 2000, there has
been a surplus.
It has been very big lately.
7.5% of GDP just ended in
2006.
The state budget surplus leads to
the fact that the state now does
not need to take new loans to
cover the deficit.
On the contrary, we started
to pay off old debts at
an accelerated rate.
Moreover, as the surplus is large,
a stabilization
fund is formed.
Please see the following
slide.
The total amount of the
stabilization fund in billions
of rubles.
We opened the stabilization
fund in 2004.
And then it grows very quickly.
And so far it has reached
2 trillion 812 billion rubles.
There are many disputes about
the stabilization fund.
It is a common view that
since we are not rich,
it is not right that
this money should be
left unmoving and not spent.
It is proposed to allow them
to support the poor,
to finance some priority
programs for the development
of the national economy,
and so on.
Finance Minister Alexei
Kudrin opposes this.
But in general, it is now about the
fact that the stabilization fund
is gradually beginning
to be uncumped, to allow it
to be at least partially
funded for investment programs,
the most important
investment, economic programs.
And yet, I would like to discuss
whether the Ministry of Finance is
doing the right thing, increasing
the stabilization fund fund,
increasing these funds at such
a rapid pace.
The stabilization fund has
a double purpose.
On the one hand, it is a
kind of pillow, some
state savings in case the
budget revenue suddenly drops.
This is a state reserve.
There is also another function
of the stabilization fund.
Through the stabilization fund,
the government takes out the economy
of the excess money that is effectively
used in the economy can not be.
That is exactly what many disagree
with, believe that it is possible,
it cannot be used.
I would like to make this
analogy here.
Money in the economy is like water in nature.
Well, it is obvious that if the earth is
not watered, then nothing will grow on the earth.
The harvest is zero.
And if the earth is watered
in a fracturable way, we will
get a mud on which nothing will grow.
The Conclusion.
Water should be directed to
the earth a little and a lot,
and exactly as much as the
earth can perceive and turn into
some useful product, some crop.
As well in the economy.
If we have too little money in
the economy, we will provoke
a recession.
If there is too much money in the economy,
we will get inflation.
So the conclusion.
Money must be like water
in nature, just as much as
the economic soil can
absorb and turn into useful products.
If we are polishing the economy too
much with money, we are threatened by inflation.
Therefore, the Ministry of Finance,
together with the Central Bank, is seeking
to sterilize, to remove the excess
money from the economy.
In order to fight inflation.
So if we want to send more money
to the economy, we need
to think about it, I repeat,
the economic soil can
take that money.
This means creating a
favorable investment climate.
If the investment climate is not
good enough, then it is pointless
to send money into the economy.
Money or go to the sand, let'
s say, will be robbed, and they will no
longer become a stabilization
fund of the Ministry of Finance, but
a stabilization fund of specific individuals
somewhere in the offshore.
Well, I have already said that in the
plans of the government is still to
increase public investment in the economy.
Well, if this leads to
a normal result, if that money
is spent normally,
it will be spent effectively.
If, I repeat, they are not used effectively,
they will either simply go to the
sand, or they will turn the
economic soil into mud, and we
will only get a price increase.
I said we are doing well
with the budget.
We have a significant surplus
of the state.
We pay off debts, we form a stabilization
fund.
However, this does not mean
that we have no budget problems.
Problems are and very serious.
The first group of problems is related
to the high dependence of budget
revenues on the global energy
conditions, on world oil and gas
prices.
Oil and gas generate
about 50% of budget revenues.
And the world prices will fall.
It is full.
It is very quick to eliminate
the budget surplus and,,
even its deficit.
In this sense, the government
has planned this, in my opinion,
a rather interesting reform.
Since 2008, the non-oil and
gas budget is planned to be reformed.
What does this mean?
And here is what.
All state revenues from oil
and gas, as well as
state revenues from oil exports
will be accumulated
in a special oil and
gas fund.
In turn, this oil and gas fund
will be split into two funds.
The Reserve Fund and the Fund for Future Generations.
In fact, there will
be no stabilization fund
since 2008.
There will be two funds.
The Reserve Fund and the Fund for Future Generations.
These funds, I repeat, will go all
the revenues from oil and gas and
oil products exports.
But if a significant part of its income
is lost, the federal budget
will obviously immediately become deficit.
In this case, a certain oil and gas transfer
from the reserve fund to the
expenditure part of the budget is provided
to cover the expenditure part
of the budget.
But the idea is that the size of
this oil-gas transfer must be
strictly determined.
Rather, the ceiling
of this oil-gas transfer must
be strictly defined.
It is not planned to exceed 3.7% of
GDP.
The idea what?
The Ministry of Finance is trying, the government
is trying to teach the economy to become
as independent as possible from
incomes, from energy resources.
This is what I spoke about the
problem of forming the income part
of the budget.
The budget spending is
also a problem.
The costs are still
calculated inefficiently.
Expenditures are included in the state budget,
and certain items of expenditure
are included in the state budget often
not because they are really needed,
but because they are done year
after year.
Or because certain lobbyists
manage to break through these costs.
This is on the one hand, and on
the other hand, when the money is
allocated for a particular item
of expenditure, it is often spent
inefficiently.
In the case of the inefficiency
of public spending, I would like
to give you this matrix, which
was made by the famous,
recently deceased American economist,
Nobel Prize laureate Milton
Friedman.
The Friedman Matrix.
What does Friedman come from?
Money is yours and money
is someone else's.
On the other hand, money can
be spent for yourself, and
money can be spent for
others.
This is the construction of the matrix.
The four segments.
Here is my money, here is the money of others.
Here for yourself, here for
others.
What do individuals, households
or companies spend?
Money for yourself.
When you get some income, you spend
it for yourself and your family
members, and you spend
your money.
In this case, spending
is done in the best way, the
most rational way.
You may be spending your
money on others.
When is it possible?
For example, you buy someone
a birthday present.
You spend your money on someone
else.
Are you interested in what here?
At least not to
spend too much.
But often you are not so selected about the
quality of the purchase, because you
are spending not for yourself.
Here, the money is not spent as effectively
as in the first quadrant,
in the first segment.
What other option is possible?
You can spend other people's money for
yourself.
When do you do it?
For example, when you eat lunch at the
company.
What are you interested in here?
To get the best set of benefits,
but you are not interested
in rational spending of
money at all.
You are not interested in saving
money as much as possible.
Money is not yours.
And finally, the worst situation, when?
When you spend someone else's money
for others.
Who does this?
Who spends other people's money?
State officials.
They collect taxes, that is, they don't spend
their money and they don't spend it for themselves.
This is the most inefficient
way of spending money.
Well, as you probably realized,
Milton Friedman and the
Chicago School he headed
are fierce marketers.
The role of the state in
the economy should
be minimized.
There are, of course, spheres, they
know that, where you can't do without
the state.
For example, the national defense.
It is unlikely that private armies
will be effectivelyined.
or the protection of the law.
The state is needed here.
Well, here, with a heart-wrenching
heart, Chicago School is
allowed by the state.
But at the same time, it
is aware that public
spending is inefficient.
Well, in Russia, we
have liberal economists,
they also advocate to
cut public spending
in every way.
The funds released will
be used more effectively
in the private sector.
The next question, the second question of
this topic.
Budgetary and fiscal policy
and macroeconomic regulation.
From the point of view of macroeconomics,
budgetary and tax policy
is a set of measures of the
state to change the state's
expenditure and taxes to
potential GDP and overcome
inflation.
In other words, the state
strives to ensure that the economy
works at full capacity and
that prices do not rise.
There is a distinction
between budgetary and tax policy.
Please look at the slide.
The purpose of a budgetary tax policy
is to overcome the cyclical recession
of the economy, when the
GDP is actually less than
the potential.
And it involves increasing
public spending or tax
cuts, or a combination of
these.
It is clear that when we increase
public spending, public
spending is a component
of the total demand.
Accordingly, the increase in
public spending leads to the fact
that the overall demand is growing.
GDP is also growing.
Please look at the schedule
on the slide.
At the beginning, the function of
total demand is AD0.
As you can see, the economy
is under-working.
GDP is less than potential.
The point of balance is
point E0.
The balance of GDP is Y0.
The potential GDP is Y with a cover.
So what can the state do?
It increases its costs.
As a result, the combined demand
curve shifts to the right, and
the GDP balance can reach
a potential level.
But that is something that would be good to remember.
That in this case works already
known to you multiplier of autonomous
expenses.
After all, if the state increases
its expenses with this income,
with this national income, then this
is autonomous expenses.
And we have already talked with
you that in the end, the balance
of GDP and national
income increase by a greater
amount than the initial
change in public spending
due to the multiplier effect.
The multiplier effect I have explained
to you once.
For example, if you remember
the company's investment costs.
The same effect is also effective
when the state increases its spending.
Please look at the slide.
What is the multiplier effect?
What is the increase in national
income?
The increase in public expenditure
multiplied by the multiplier
of public autonomous expenditure.
And again I want to remind you that
the multiplier of autonomous costs
is calculated by the formula known to you.
Multiplier is equal to a unit
divided by one, minus the
limit inclination to consumption.
Another way of conducting
a budgetary-tax policy
is to reduce taxes.
The state does not increase its
expenses, but reduces taxes
in the expectation that
people will have additional funds
that they will use to increase
the overall demand, which will
again stimulate the economy.
In this case, the same thing,
look, you can go back to the old
schedule, in this case, also the
reduction of taxes leads to the
fact that people have more money,
household people have more money,
and they can increase
their expenses.
Accordingly, the curve of the
AD shifts to the right, and the balance
WOP becomes equal to the potential.
To avoid misunderstandings, I want
to explain that reducing taxes does
not mean reducing government spending
at the same time.
The government reduces taxes
but does not reduce spending.
If it reduced its costs,
then there would be no stimulating
effect.
The state keeps its expenses the
same, but reduces taxes.
The disadvantage of such
a policy is that it can lead
to a deficit of
the state budget.
The deficit of the state budget
has a negative impact on the economy.
Especially if he is big.
The budget deficit is considered
to exceed 3% of gross domestic
product.
That is much.
Why is the state budget deficit
bad?
What is wrong with everything he does?
If there is a deficit,
the deficit must be covered.
How can it be covered?
You can print extra money.
This threatens inflation.
The government often covers the
budget deficit with loans in the
financial markets.
If the government has a
deficit, it must be borrowed.
But when such a large borrower enters
the market, this leads to the fact
that the price of the loan, namely
the interest rate, begins to rise.
And if you remember, investment costs
of firms and household expenses,
they are related to interest rate.
When interest rates rise, business
investments and household
consumer spending decrease.
This phenomenon is called the macroeconomic
suppression effect.
That is, if we cut taxes without cutting
government spending, we will face
the fact that because of the rise in interest
rates, investment costs of firms will
be reduced and partially negative consequences
will be caused by the increase
in interest rates.
This may also partly lead to the
fact that household expenses will
not grow so much due to the rise
in interest rates.
Well, by the way, the same effect
will be when the state increases
its spending without increasing
taxes.
The budget deficit also has the
same negative consequences.
Well, and if we talk about the good,
the tax reduction leads to the effect
of a tax multiplier.
And this effect means that with
some tax cuts, the combined
demand and national income
will eventually grow by a
larger amount.
Please look at the formula
on the slide.
Δy is equal to mpc divided by units
minus mpc, multiplied by the cluster
minus Δt.
Δt – change of taxes.
Why a minus sign?
Because if taxes rise, it will have
a bad impact on overall demand
and national income.
If taxes are reduced, this, on
the contrary, has a favorable effect
on the growth of overall demand
and national income.
MPC, divided into units
minus MPC, is a tax multiplier.
Here it just shows how much
rubles changes the total
demand and national income
when taxes change by 1 ruble.
The tax multiplier is described
in more detail in the text of
the lectures.
I was talking about fiscal-
budgetary policies.
Another type of budgetary
tax policy is the deterrent
fiscal policy, which is applied
when the GDP actually exceeds
the potential, that is, the
economy is overloaded.
This situation is filled with inflation.
The economy will still return
the potential GDP, but at higher
prices.
And in order to prevent inflation,
the state reduces its expenses or
increases taxes, or does both, carries
out a combination of
these measures.
Both reducing government spending
and increasing taxes lead to the
fact that the combined demand
curve shifts to the left, and
the balanced GDP returns
to the potential level, look
at the slide, returns to
the potential level, and
inflation does not occur.
Well, here I would like
to emphasize that all
multiplicative effects at the same time
act in the opposite direction.
To conclude this question and at the
same time this topic, I would
like to say a few words about
the long-term consequences of tax
policy budget.
In fact, what I told you before
is all about short-term
politics, politics of
treating a sick organism.
For example, the economy is experiencing
a decline, meaning you need to
give the economy a pill, increase
in public spending or tax cuts.
Economies are threatening inflation,
we need to inject spending cuts
or tax increases.
This is the policy of treating
the sick organism.
But it is important to talk
about the long-term
consequences of fiscal policy.
And here we should not forget
that in the long run the economy
is aiming for potential
GDP.
Accordingly, long-term economic
growth depends on how
fast the potential GDP
is growing.
Accordingly, fiscal policy should
be assessed from this perspective.
Does it contribute to the potential
GDP growth or, on the contrary, is it
inhibiting it?
There is, as always, no consensus
among economists.
But there are economists, I will
call them state men, who believe
that the task of the state
is to carry out large-scale
investment programs.
As a result, by increasing
public investment, we will get
an increase in economic potential,
an increase in potential GDP,
which will ensure long-term
economic growth.
Well, I don't want to impose my
point of view, but I still feel
closer to the position
of liberal economists.
They have a different position.
They argue that government
policies to support economic
growth can have a short-term
positive effect, but
in the long run it is devastating.
Well, to not be blatant, I will
tell you such a story.
It is a classic and has been included in many textbooks.
19th century.
France was behind England with the help
of its fleet.
And it was decided at the
state level to provide support
to the fleet.
In other words, the government
will start building new vessels.
As I said, a large-scale
investment program was
decided.
Public orders have
increased, new ships have
been built.
The construction of new vessels has led to the
increase in demand for what?
On a ship, on a tree, on guns.
There was also a pleasant
multiplicative effect across the economy.
In a relatively short time,
France became the
owner of the world's largest
navy.
Pattern of sail.
In England, steam ships were already built
at this time.
This is a very clear example
of the inefficiency
of public spending in
the long run.
Moreover, public spending is inefficient
in the modern era, when economies
are very fast, when
social needs change
very quickly.
And economies need to be very
flexible, very quickly restructuring.
And the state in this regard, well,
it is not its strongest side
the ability to quickly rebuild.
Well, for example, we can
take a state program to
release the best computers and
mobile phones.
Let us assume that we will that goal.
But when we reach it, we will find that
the whole world has gone far ahead,
and in a completely different direction.
And in such a way, probably, that
could not even be foreseen at the
time when we accepted this program.
For modern economies, flexibility
is essential.
This does not mean that
the state should leave the
economy at all.
There are areas, I repeat, where it is
difficult to do without the state.
The role of the state in the transitional economy,
such as the Russian economy, is important.
The task of the state is to create
a market infrastructure.
To ensure that such structures
are created that ensure the effective
functioning of the market.
This is a problem that no one
can solve without the state.
As for social expenses,
they should be reduced
radically.
The World Bank recently conducted
a survey of social benefits
in five regions of Russia.
The result was completely deadly.
More than half of the state benefits
are not received by those who need them.
The state's social expenditure
is inefficient.
The state must cease to be a
cow-cow, but must create conditions
in which every working
person could provide
himself.
This is the real challenge
for an effective state.
So, ladies and gentlemen, let us go to
the last topic of our course with you.
Money, banks and monetary policy.
Please see the topic on
the slide.
The first is money and money aggregates.
The first thing I would
like to point out is that
it is wrong to claim money
with the notes we carry in
our wallets.
It is money, but it is not the
only possible form of money.
This is a strict definition of money.
Please see the slide.
Money is any good that
can perform three functions.
The first function is the means of handling.
The second function is the
measurement of value.
The third function is the means of storage.
What do these functions mean?
Many of you have probably heard
of it.
The means of circulation means
that goods are exchanged through money.
If there were no money, how would
we have to exchange?
Probably a goods.
In the Barter.
In principle, exchange is possible, but
it is very difficult.
The use of money as a means of
circulation often simplifies
the exchange.
In this sense, money is no less
a great invention of mankind
than the wheel.
The second function is the
measurement of value.
The value of all goods is expressed
in money.
Again, if there were no money, it
would be hard to say, for example,
how much a suit costs.
So many shirts, or so many
shoes, or so many shorts,
and so on.
There would be no single meter.
Money allows us to bring everything
to one measurement – all commodities.
And finally, the third function is
the means of storage.
It means that money performs the
function when it is not spent immediately
upon receipt, but is
saved for further purchases.
The history of humanity is the history
of money.
In my opinion, it is a very
fascinating story.
Unfortunately, there is no time
to explain it in detail.
Well, you probably know that historically,
money has been individual commodities
from the beginning.
What goods are used as money?
Those that were in this area are
the most important, the most used.
Where is the grain, where is the honey, where are
the skins.
The Vikings have brown fish, for example.
That is what is interesting.
These were so-called commodity
money, but there were also
so-called symbolic money.
Symbolic money, the role
of symbolic money performed
a good that could not be used.
Not for production or consumption.
What objects are.
Where they were shells of some particular
shape, where they were dog teeth.
On the island of Yab in the Pacific
Ocean, money was stones with holes
in the middle, which was convenient
to wear on the six.
The heavier the stone, the greater
the value in exchange it represented.
That is, symbolic money,
some items that are
used as money, but which
can not be used otherwise.
Not for production, not for consumption.
But the existence of symbolic
money suggests that
money can be any good that
people agree to
consider money.
Money is a matter of convention.
The only thing that is required is
that this benefit is in limited quantity.
No one will give real goods for
something that rolls freely
under his feet.
Very often, the use of a particular
object as symbolic money
is consumed by the authority
of the state, which obliges
the object to pay, and it
itself accepts it to
pay taxes.
But, for example, our paper
money is nothing but
symbolic money.
Because for a thousand ruble
note you can get much more goods
in exchange than for a piece of
paper of the same area.
How did the history of money develop?
The role of money has gradually been fixed,
as you know, behind the precious metals.
In Europe, silver was first
money, gold was too little,
and then gold.
And then, gradually, gold
and silver were replaced by
paper money.
What is paper money?
These are actually bank
debt receipts.
What did banks do?
They accepted gold and silver
in deposits, and instead gave their
debt receipts to depositors, banknotes
that depositors used
for transactions.
Banks were obliged to exchange
banknotes for coins at the first request.
And gradually the world of
banks emerged the largest banks,
central banks.
And they also took gold and silver
in deposits, and issued their
receipts, national paper money.
The modern paper money
we are used to is nothing
more than central bank
debt receipts.
But if debt receipts, then immediately
the question arises of receipt
for what?
There was no problem before.
Central banks were obliged to
exchange their banknotes, their
debt receipts, for gold, for example.
What is bad about this system?
If paper money is tied to gold,
then its quantity in the economy
must correspond to the amount
of gold in the bank's deposits.
Imagine that the amount of gold
in the economy has decreased.
What will it lead to?
Paper money will be less.
Prices will fall, but if the money
is less, the prices will become less.
If gold, on the contrary, came into
the economy, paper money will
become more, prices will rise.
But in general, the price jump, even
up or down, is harmful to the economy.
Why is?
Business needs stability.
Price jumping increases business
risks, respectively, negatively affect
the development of the economy.
In the era of gold standards,
price hikes could not be avoided.
A year with high prices could well
follow a year with low prices.
Gold came into the economy,
paper money became more, and prices
increased accordingly.
Gold has gone out of the economy, money has
become less, prices will fall.
So that it won't be boring,
I'll tell you a story.
The United States of America
in the 90s is now the 19th century.
In circulation already then were
paper dollars, but they were subject to
exchange for gold.
The amount of dollars in the
economy should correspond
to the amount of gold.
As it went, the fields were
exhausted, the gold in the economy
became less.
Prices have fallen.
I have already told you that price jumping
up or down is harmful to
the economy.
But when prices fall, there is another
nuance.
What do you think when prices
suddenly fall, who wins, the debtor
or the lender?
The creditor actually wins.
Well, imagine you borrowed
some amount of money, you plan
to produce some goods, for
example, grow the harvest and
settle with your lender and
pay interest.
And prices suddenly fell.
You borrowed cheap money, and you have
to give expensive money.
You will have to do what?
Give more goods, prices have
fallen for goods to
settle with your lender.
This was exactly what happened in the 1990s
in the United States.
Prices have fallen.
In a difficult situation was
the real sector, which took
money, which took money borrowed
at a fixed interest rate.
In a relatively good position were
banks, which gave money in loan
with cheap money, and received
expensive money.
Presidential elections were
held at this time.
Two candidates came together.
One candidate advocated that in
the field of monetary circulation
everything should be left the same,
that paper dollars should
be bound only to gold.
And his opponent was in favor
of the security of paper
dollars not only gold,
but silver.
Why Why?
What he wanted?
He wanted inflation.
He wanted to print more
money.
Well, if the security of
money is not only gold, but
silver, you can print more dollars,
and prices will stop falling,
and maybe even rise.
The elections are over.
The Silver Party lost the election.
After the election, journalist
Fred Baum wrote a story.
The wizard from the OS country, which
was later, many years later, the
Soviet writer Alexander Volkov,
having reworked, called the
wizard of the smaragd city.
Let us remember what the story is about.
Girl Ellie against her will is
caught by a hurricane in a magical
country.
Must go out.
Who does she take as allies?
Who is there first?
Who did she find first?
The first?
I feared.
A frail man.
What do you think is the social layer?
Of course the farmer.
The second who is there?
her satellite.
The iron wood.
This is who?
Of course, the industrial worker.
The Third?
The lion is cowardly.
It is hard to guess here.
The cowardly Lion, the same candidate for
president who lost the election.
I didn't want courage, determination,
pressure, anything.
And all this company goes along the road
paved with yellow bricks.
Roads of danger.
They could have died many times.
And then she finally arrives in the
Emerald City.
If you take the American realities,
the country's main city is what?
Of course Washington.
Where all people look at the world through
green glasses.
The city ruler, if you take American
realities, then, of course, the
president of the United States, promises to
help everyone, but turns out to be a scammer.
How does the girl get saved?
She escapes by learning about the magical
power of her silver shoes.
Here is such an allegory around the question
of what should be the basis of
the money mass, paper money.
Gold or Gold Plus Silver?
How does the modern economy respond to
this question?
Not gold or silver.
Money in modern countries
is issued by central
banks and is not
tied to gold or silver.
What is Securing Paper
Money?
When central banks plan to issue
money, they look at the equation
of quantitative money theory.
Do you know well?
Again once again.
M is the money mass in the economy for
which the central bank is responsible.
V is the speed of money.
P is the level of prices in the economy.
G = real GDP
First of all, the central bank
is trying to predict the speed
of money circulation.
It is known, it is given.
Why should the central bank monitor?
The growth of the money supply corresponds
to the growth of real GDP.
In this case, prices will be stable.
The economy will grow in the absence
of inflation.
If the central bank printed too
much money, what would
it provoke?
Of course, the price increase, inflation.
What if the central bank printed
too little money?
In the modern economy, prices go down
extremely slowly, extremely reluctantly.
Prices will probably not fall here.
In this case, the real GDP will
fall if there is too little money.
The central bank is causing
a crisis.
So what is the provision
of money, paper money in the
modern economy?
The total real GDP, or more broadly,
the national wealth of
a given country.
Now let's talk about money
aggregates.
Well to...
I will ask you a question first.
Maybe unhumble.
Listen, how much money you
have, please tell me.
But I will not hear the answer.
To be honest, I don't care much about him.
I don't care how much money you have.
I am interested in something else.
How would you answer this question yourself?
What do you consider as money when
you ask yourself how much money
you have?
Well look at.
Most likely, the first thing
you will remember is the cash
you have at home.
Let's say the desk boxes.
A known amount.
Next, what will you remember?
You will probably remember your
bank account.
The money you have on
your bank account is money.
But agree, a few others.
If you have cash, you can go out at
the nearest kiosk at night and buy
a bottle of beer.
There is nothing to do with the bank account
in the kiosk.
The accounts will be different.
If you have a plastic
card, you may find that a bankomat
or store is a receiving
card.
And if you have the enlightenment of
accepting a deposit before the
bank opens, you have nothing to do
with this certificate.
And the contributions are different.
There are current contributions
that can be used in principle at
any time.
There are contributions made for the time.
They cannot be used before
the deadline.
Maybe, but with losses.
I repeat, money is different.
And since money is different,
there is a desire to sort them out.
See also.
Money, you can say, money is
a liquid asset.
An asset is property.
Liquidity, the ability of an asset,
rapid and without loss, to exchange
for other assets.
But the most liquid asset, obviously,
is what?
for personal money.
So here.
See the definition on the slide.
Groups of liquid assets with
approximately the same level
of liquidity are called monetary
aggregates.
The preparation of monetary aggregates
is the prerogative of central banks.
Since market economies in different
countries are roughly similar, aggregates
are similar.
Although there is a certain difference,
of course.
We will talk about the money aggregates
in Russia.
Here, please, look at the table
of the currency aggregates in Russia
and their sizes for April 1, 2007.
The first unit that the Bank of Russia
allocates is called M0.
M0 is cash in circulation
or money outside the
banking system.
Money in the hands of households
or in the companies.
The next unit is called M1.
Pay attention to how the aggregates
are built.
This is a sort of snow
coma principle.
Each next unit includes the
previous plus something else.
Each next unit is a broader
concept than the previous one.
And the M1 unit actually includes
what?
First, M0, cash, plus funds
on deposits for demand,
plus funds on current
billing accounts.
The next unit is called M2 and
includes, as you already
understand, the unit M1 plus
funds on urgent savings
deposits.
The last unit used
in Russia is the
M3.
It includes, as you can see from the
table, the M2 aggregate,
plus deposit sortings, plus
government bonds, plus all foreign
currency deposits in ruble equivalent.
Note, the Central Bank of Russia
reasoning about like spouses
in the kitchen.
They wondered, they thought about how
much money they had.
First remembered what?
How much cash do they have?
This is the M0.
Then they remembered how much they have in
the average current account, this is
the M1 unit.
Then they remembered how much money
they had on an urgent savings deposit.
This is the M2 unit and so on.
The only thing that differentiates
the mentality of the bank of
Russia from the mentality of the spouses
in the kitchen is that the spouses
would probably very quickly remember
their cash currency, dollars or euros.
But the Bank of Russia, the cash
currency available in the hands of
the population, does not include in any unit.
Includes currency deposits,
currency accounts in banks
and cash in no single unit.
I would like to point out that the money
aggregates are arranged on the principle
of decreasing liquidity.
Each subsequent aggregate includes
all, less and less liquid assets.
The most liquid unit M0.
The lowest liquid assets are in the
M3 aggregate.
Liquidity is the ability of
an asset, quickly and without
loss, to exchange for other assets.
Well, the aggregates we and you, I
think, considered.
We move on to the second question.
The second is the two-level banking
system and the monetary base.
I will address this question rather superficially,
I will only say the most general
things.
More in detail with the balance sheet
of the Central Bank, it would be better for
you to look at the texts of the lectures.
I will say just that, literally
a few basic provisions.
Well, it is obvious that the supply
of money in the economy is carried out
by the banking system.
In a market economy, a two-
tiered banking system
is characterized.
The first level is the Central
Bank of the country, it is actually
the main regulator of the money
mass in the economy.
The second level of the banking system
is comprised of commercial banks.
All banks are considered
commercial banks except
the central bank.
Sberbank of Russia is the
largest bank in Russia, the
same commercial bank as a small
bank in our city, for example,
in a small city.
For the basis, please see the following
slide.
The basis of the monetary system
is the Central Bank banknotes
or cash in circulation.
Where do they come from?
Of course, the central bank
printed cash, but it not just
printed them, it is not thrown
out on the streets.
Cash in circulation, cash
comes into circulation
in two ways.
First, they come into circulation
when the central bank buys
gold, foreign currency
or government securities.
One can say that the central
bank is paid by them when
buying gold, foreign currency and
securities.
But that is of course a simplification.
In fact, the central bank does
not directly imitate money at the
time of buying gold, currency
and securities.
They are simulated, cash arises
in circulation later.
But anyway, when the central
bank buys gold, currency or
securities, the cash supply
in the economy increases.
But for the sake of simplicity, it
can be assumed that it
is paid directly in cash,
although this is not certain.
Logic is probably understandable.
I am a central bank, I buy,
say, gold or government
securities or U.S. dollars.
When I buy them, I
issue cash, I pay in
cash, cash, and
there is a cash issue.
On the other hand, cash arises in the
economy as a result of the fact that
the central bank lends credit
to the government and commercial
banks.
The Central Bank does not lend
individuals and firms, it lends
to commercial banks and the government.
Well, again, with a considerable
amount of simplification, it can be
assumed that the central bank issues
loans in cash.
Cash in circulation plus the funds
of commercial banks on the Central
Bank accounts form
the monetary base.
The monetary base is a kind of skeleton
of the money mass, a kind of primacy of
the money mass.
The money mass in the economy
grows from the monetary base.
I just want to emphasize here
that the cash mass is not
all cash.
But you remember that there are
different money aggregates.
Cash is only the M0 unit, but
also the M1, M2, M3 units.
But still the monetary base is the basis
of the monetary mass in the economy.
The central bank creates the monetary base.
But what is interesting is that
commercial banks in the process
of their activities, by issuing
loans, increase the money mass
in the economy.
How does it happen?
Well, imagine that you or your
company came to a commercial bank
for a loan.
How will a commercial bank give you a loan?
Most often, you open an account.
But as you hope to remember, the current
accounts of firms and the population
in commercial banks, it is also
money, it is the M1 unit.
Accordingly, issuing loans by opening
accounts, commercial banks
create additional money in the
form of an aggregate, in the form
of current accounts, that is, in the
form of an aggregate M1.
How is it done?
Here you better look at this mechanism
in detail on the texts of lectures,
on the text of lectures.
It is detailed there.
And we will immediately move
to another very important issue, monetary
policy and its instruments.
Read the definition,
see the slide.
Monetary or monetary policy is
a policy on changing the
monetary mass in the economy.
The central bank plays an important
role in its implementation as the
main link of the country's banking system.
Let us look at the central bank'
s main functions.
Look at the slide.
The central bank is the
country's emission center.
That is, it monopolyly releases
national banknotes in circulation.
The second function is that the Central Bank
is a bank of banks.
What does it express?
It keeps the reserves of commercial banks,
issues them to courts, and there
is supervision over their activities.
The third most important function of the Central
Bank is that it is the banking officer of the government.
What does it express?
The central bank places state
securities, provides credit to
the government, performs
settlement operations for the government,
keeps the Treasury accounts,
and keeps official gold
and currency reserves.
The Central Bank is the main settlement
center of the country, that
is, acts as an intermediary between
banks in the implementation
of non-cash payments.
And finally, the fifth function,
which we will actually talk
about later.
The central bank is the body of
regulation of the economy
through monetary policy.
Please see the following slide.
It focuses on the objectives and instruments
of monetary policy.
There are strategic goals, there are
intermediate goals.
I will speak about the strategic
goals, the ultimate goals, the goals
of the Central Bank.
What does the central bank want?
What are its strategic goals?
Look at the slide.
The first goal is economic growth.
He wants the economy to grow.
The second is full employment.
Unemployment should not exceed
the minimum required level.
The third key is price
stability.
The fourth feature is a stable balance
of payments.
To these objectives, the Bank
of Russia may use the following
basic instruments.
Look at the slide.
Let's not rush to find out the tools.
The first instrument is the purchase and
sale of government securities.
Or, as they say, operations in the
open market.
How can the central bank regulate
the money supply by using
this function, by using this
instrument?
Well, imagine, I am the
central bank and you are
commercial banks.
Let's say I buy your
government securities
in the balance sheet.
When I buy these papers,
I pay in rubles.
That is, I increase the monetary base and
the money mass in the economy.
But it can be imagined.
You are commercial banks, you are
my securities, and I am the answer to you.
So, by buying securities, I increase
the money mass.
Most often in modern conditions, the
Bank of Russia carries out operations
in the open market through direct
and reverse repo transactions.
What is it?
Repo operations, in general,
are repurchase operations.
Suppose commercial banks have
securities.
They are temporarily sold
to the central bank.
The central bank pays in rubles
and thus increases the money
mass in the economy.
But the REPO deal implies that
after a certain time commercial
banks are obliged to buy these
securities back from the
Central Bank at a higher
price.
The price difference is the percentage
that the central bank
receives from commercial banks.
But still, with the associative operation
of direct REPO, the Central Bank
increases the money mass in the economy.
And with the reverse REPO operation, everything
happens the opposite.
The central bank temporarily
sells its state securities
to commercial banks.
And when he sells them, he temporarily
pulls the money out of the
economy, reduces the money out.
The second instrument of purchase is the sale
of foreign currency.
But here is essentially the same mechanism.
If the central bank buys dollars
or euros, it emits rubles
in response.
As a result, the money mass in the
economy is increasing.
Well, imagine, I am the Central Bank, you
are a commercial bank, you sell me currency,
you give me currency, I give you
rubles.
As a result, the money mass
is increasing.
On the contrary, when the central bank
sells currency to commercial
banks, it pulls rubles out of
the economy, that is, the money mass decreases.
The third instrument is the change
of the mandatory reserve rate.
What is a compulsory reserve standard?
Let's say commercial banks
are attracting funds from depositors.
They cannot all these attracted funds
to let business turnaround.
For example, allow for loans.
They are obliged to reserve part
of the funds attracted at
the Central Bank.
Accordingly, the higher the
mandatory reserve rate, the
less the commercial banks
have funds to issue loans.
And I have already told you that all
kinds of expenses commercial banks give
out loans, opening current accounts
to borrowers, they increase the
money mass in the economy.
The higher the mandatory reserve
rate, the less the money
in the economy.
And the opposite.
The fourth instrument.
Changes in interest rates on deposits
of commercial banks in the
Central Bank.
How does this tool work?
I have already said that commercial
banks are obliged to reserve part
of the funds attracted in
the Central Bank.
But, say, the central bank
wants commercial banks to hold
more money in the
central bank.
On the one hand, can he do anything?
Increase the mandatory reserve rate.
However, central banks rarely
use this tool.
What is this tool bad?
He cuts all the banks under one scarf.
There is no separate reserve
rate for Sberbank and no separate
for Alpha Bank.
She is the same for everyone.
What if he doesn't want to cut them under
one hammer?
What can the central bank offer?
He may offer commercial banks
on a voluntary basis to
open additional depository
accounts, on which he pays
interest.
The central bank, the commercial
bank, does not pay interest
on the obligatory reserves.
So throughout the world.
But on deposits, which are
opened on a voluntary
basis, the central bank pays,
even if small, but still
a percentage.
How much higher is this percentage?
by what?
The more of their funds commercial
banks hold on the deposit
account of the central banks.
The less they can
lend.
And I have said that whenever
commercial banks lend, they
increase the money mass in
the economy.
The less money in the economy.
The fifth instrument.
Changes in the accounting rate
or refinancing rate.
In the West, it is a very important
tool for regulating the money mass
in the economy.
Accounting rate is the rate
at which Western central banks
lend commercial.
Well, let them lend not at an accounting
rate, but at a rate very close
to the accounting rate.
So what does it work out?
The lower the accounting rate,
the more loans commercial banks
can take from the central bank,
the more loans they give
themselves, the more money in
the economy.
The accounting rate determines
a lot in Western countries.
If it decreases, then the interest
rate in the economy also decreases.
A lot depends on interest
rates.
And investment, and consumption, and the exchange
rate of the national currency, and much more.
Therefore, any change in the accounting
rate or even rumors about a possible
change attract increased attention
of all financiers.
There is no accounting rate
in Russia.
We have a refinancing rate.
The difference is quite significant.
I have said that in the West,
central banks lend commercial
banks at a rate very close to the
accounting rate.
In Russia, the central bank does
not lend commercial banks at the
refinancing rate.
Today, the refinancing rate is
ten and a half percent of
the annual rate.
Commercial banks lend the central
bank at six with a small
interest rate.
At an annual interest rate of
six with a small percentage.
The refinancing rate is not so much
a tool for regulating
the money mass in the economy,
but an indicator of the reduction
of interest rates.
Looks are what.
Interbank market interest
rates are falling along with
the decrease in inflation.
The central bank also reduces
the refinancing rate.
That is, the refinancing rate does not
so much determine the market interest
rates, it is always higher than them.
How much followed him, after them.
It is not so much
a tool, but an indicator.
I repeat the reduction in refinancing rates.
It is said to be an indicator
of the decline in interest rates
in the economy.
In the future, the refinancing
rate may become a monetary
policy instrument.
But for this it needs to be reduced,
visible.
And the central bank
really has to give out credit.
The sixth instrument.
The placement of central bank
bonds among commercial banks.
What a logic.
The central bank can sell
its own bonds to a
commercial bank.
The Bank of Russia.
The same mechanism is already known.
When a central bank sells its
bonds to a commercial bank,
it receives money in exchange.
It pulls money out of the economy.
When he buys his bonds back from
commercial banks, he returns the
money mass to the economy,
that is, increases the
money mass.
The seventh instrument is the regulation of funds on the accounts
of the Ministry of Finance in the Central Bank.
The Central Bank.
We have said that on the one hand, the government
of the Ministry of Finance collects
taxes, on the other hand, considers
expenses.
But if the taxes collected more than
the expenses, the funds on
the accounts of the Ministry of Finance
in the Central Bank increases, so
the money is withdrawn from the economy.
How does money become less in the economy?
When the balance of the account of the Ministry
of Finance in the Central Bank decreases,
the money is returned to the economy.
But this instrument is not used
by the Central Bank as much as the Ministry
of Finance itself.
It is therefore involved in
regulating the money mass in the economy.
I have listed 7 tools.
The main things we have in our economy, in
Russia, are for today the purchase and
sale of foreign currency, the REPO operation,
which I also talked about, the change
of the interest rate on deposits of
commercial banks in the Central Bank
and the change of the balance on the
accounts of the Ministry of Finance in
the Central Bank.
So again.
The central bank, using these
instruments, can either increase
the money supply in the economy
or decrease it.
When does it increase and when does
it decrease?
Why Why?
If the economy is experiencing a crisis,
if the balance of GDP is less
than the potential GDP, the economy
is underloaded, then what should
the Bank of Russia do?
Stimulate overall demand by
increasing the money supply in
the economy to increase GDP and
increase employment.
And if the economy is threatened
by inflation, the Bank of Russia must
apply anti-inflationary policy,
namely to reduce the money
mass in the economy.
The central bank of Russia
has recently established
an anti-inflation policy.
But here there is a rather serious
problem and it is related to the
high world prices of oil and
gas.
Let us reason.
High global oil and gas prices.
What does this lead to?
Foreign currency is introduced into the country.
For example the dollar.
If the dollar becomes more in the market,
in the currency market, then the law of
any, one for all commodities.
If there are more products on the market, it will be cheaper.
So what does the influx of dollars
lead to?
The fall of the dollar against
the ruble.
Or what is the same?
The rise of the ruble against
the dollar.
So I said that the currency, the
US dollar, is coming to the Russian currency
market.
Dollars are increasing.
The dollar is cheaper against
the ruble.
Or what is the same?
The ruble is rising against the dollar.
What should we remember in this regard?
We must remember the formula of
the real exchange rate.
Again once again.
This is the nominal rate of the ruble
in US dollars.
Ruble is now given more dollars.
The nominal rate of the ruble is rising.
The ruble is rising against the dollar.
The dollar is cheaper against the ruble.
For the ruble, they give more dollars.
So what is it threatening?
The real rate of the ruble.
The real rate of the ruble is
the price ratio.
If the real rate of the
ruble rises, I said, it leads to
the fact that our goods become
less competitive
both in the Russian market
and in the world markets.
So our net exports are falling.
Remember, now let us remember the
equation of total demand.
Where is it at us?
The real rate of the ruble
rises, the ruble is
expensive, and net exports fall.
But net exports are a component
part of the total demand.
If it falls, the overall demand
for our goods decreases.
This is full of economic problems.
Economic downturn is full of.
What can be done to prevent
such an adverse development?
The central bank is buying the dollar
that comes into the country.
This is to prevent
the ruble from growing.
On the one hand, the supply
of dollars in the Russian currency
market is growing.
On the other hand, the demand for dollars
from the central bank is growing.
The growth of demand blocked the growth of supply.
The dollar may not fall in this
case.
If it falls, it is not very important.
Not as it would have fallen if the
central bank had not intervened.
All nothing.
But if the central bank buys
dollars, we talked about
it, it imitates rubles.
It leads.
I forgot to say.
When the central bank buys dollars,
what is the positive side
of this?
The central bank's gold reserves
are increasing.
Accordingly, we can easily
quench our debts, external debt,
and even reserves are increasing.
Please pay attention to the slide.
Here you can see the changes
in the gold and foreign reserves of the
Bank of Russia in the ninety-eighth, in the
two thousand-seventh years, in millions of dollars.
And you see that in the ninety-eighth year
the gold and foreign reserves of the Bank
of Russia were very insignificant.
It can be assumed that they were
at zero in the early ninety-eighth
year, and in the ninety-nine,
in the early ninety-nine years
at all, we had gold and foreign
reserves of just twelve
billion dollars.
That is very little.
But gradually, in connection with
economic growth and high world prices
for oil and gas, our gold and foreign
exchange reserves are growing very
quickly.
In one year from January 1 of the
sixth year to January 1 of the
seventh year, they grew more
than one and a half times.
Probably a 60 percent
is possible.
And now we have gold
reserves of $300
billion.
Thirty-four a billion dollars.
Here we can not say exactly on
gold and currency reserves, but somewhere,
probably, place in the fourth
in the world, maybe, on the fifth.
We are now in good shape with
our gold reserves.
But what is bad?
By buying currency, by increasing
its gold and foreign reserves,
the Bank of Russia, as I said,
emits rubles.
So what is increasing?
The ruble money in our economy.
Let us now look at the quantitative
theory of money equation of
the IMPU.
What happens?
The money volume in the economy is growing rapidly.
Let the speed of money circulation
be known at the moment, but the
money mass is growing.
The growth of money mass is significantly
ahead of the growth of real GDP.
What is it filled?
of inflation.
With the same negative consequences.
What must be done?
The central bank and the
Ministry of Finance must
sterilize excess liquidity.
Bind rubles that are not needed for the economy.
I would like to emphasize again that
money is like water.
Money should not be much or little,
but exactly as much as the
economy needs to digest this
money and turn it into
real GDP.
If there is more money, what
should I do?
You need to connect excess money.
Otherwise, price increases are inevitable.
That is what he actually does.
This is done by the Bank of Russia and the Ministry of Finance.
That is, I want to emphasize that
the high world oil prices create
very serious problems in
implementing monetary and anti-
inflation policy, and difficulties
in implementing monetary
and anti-inflation policy.
So, the last question of our
last topic.
Transfer mechanism and
monetary policy effectiveness.
I would like to repeat once again
that monetary policy is important not
in itself, but as a means of influencing
macroeconomic indicators.
The transfer mechanism
by which the money mass
affects macroeconomic
indicators is called the
money transmission mechanism.
In this mechanism, the following
main elements can be identified.
Please look at the slide.
What can the central bank
do first?
It can change the monetary base and the
money mass in the economy.
Further, the change in the money mass
affects the change in the real
interest rate.
A change in the real interest
rate affects a change in the
overall demand.
And finally, the change in total
demand affects the change
in real GDP.
This may not be a very simple
transmission mechanism.
Let's say the economy is going down.
The balanced GDP is actually less
than the potential GDP.
What to do with the central bank?
In this case, it should conduct
a stimulating monetary policy or,
they say, a policy of cheap money.
Stimulating monetary policy is
monetary policy aimed at
increasing overall demand
in conditions where the balanced
GDP is less than the potential.
Please look at the slide.
If a stimulating monetary policy
is applied, the mechanism of monetary
transmission looks like this.
The central bank increases the monetary
base, which leads to the increase of
the money supply.
The growth of the money mass in the
economy leads to a decrease
in the real interest rate,
money becomes more, money
becomes cheaper.
The real interest rate is
getting lower.
The reduction of the real
interest rate leads to the
increase of expenses sensitive
to change, to its change.
What are the costs that
are sensitive to the change
in the real interest rate?
These are household consumer
expenses and company investment
expenses.
So costs are growing, and overall
demand is growing.
The growth of overall demand contributes
to the growth of GDP.
Please see the following slide.
Stimulating monetary policy and
changes in GDP.
What do we see?
On the left and on the right diagrams.
And there, and there, due to the increase of
the money mass in the economy, the
overall demand is growing.
The combined demand curve is shifting
to the right, but the results are
exactly the opposite.
What do we see on the left picture?
There we have a short-term curve
of the total offer horizontally.
This means that companies can increase
output in response to the growth of
overall demand without rising prices.
In this case, monetary, stimulating
monetary policy is quite
effective.
What do we see in the right picture?
The balance of GDP has reached
its potential level.
In this case, it is pointless
to conduct a stimulating policy.
Growth in production, if any, will only
occur in a very short period of time.
What will the economy quickly get back to?
GDP at higher prices.
We will only get inflation.
I was talking about incentive policy.
A stimulating monetary policy.
However, the central bank often
conducts not a stimulating but
a deterrent monetary policy.
When does he resort to her?
It is used when the economy is not
threatened by a decline, but by
inflation.
The price increase.
In this case, the central bank should
not stimulate the overall demand,
but rather contain it.
A deterrent monetary policy, or the
policy of expensive money,
is aimed at limiting the
aggregate demand by reducing
the money supply in the economy.
So if the central bank is holding
back, carries out a deterrent monetary
policy, it thus limits the growth
of the aggregate demand.
As a result, inflation is slowing down.
But it is in principle monetary
policy, either deterrent
or stimulating, which is often
applied by central banks.
I repeat again.
If the economy is threatened with a decline,
then we must conduct a stimulating
policy, increase the money supply
in the economy, so that the
overall demand and production grow.
What if the economy is threatened by
another threat?
The inflation.
On the contrary, central banks
conduct a deterrent monetary
policy to limit the overall
demand in order to fight
inflation.
Well, to finish, I would like to
stop at this is what problem.
One of the leading economics schools
of modern times is the
Monetary School.
of Monetaryism.
I said that the leader
of the monetarist school is
the recently deceased Nobel Prize
laureate, Milton Friedman.
Literally, monetaryism in translation into
Russian can be said monetaryism.
The monetarist's slogan is money.
Monetaries see the change in the
money mass as the most important
factor affecting all macroeconomic indicators.
But that is what matters.
Monetaries, I have already told you,
the stubborn marketers, they oppose
the arbitrary interference of the
state in the economy.
I like this Milton
Friedman.
I don't literally remember, I can only explain
the point.
The state is not the driver,
it is the passenger in a car with power.
And it is not allowed for
a passenger with authority to
catch the driver.
The car will quickly fly into the quarter.
Thus, recognizing the importance
of monetary policy as the most important
regulator of the economy, the monetarists
oppose the arbitrary monetary
policy of the state.
They believe that it is wrong if
the state, based on some of its
seven-minute interests, today
increases the money mass,
tomorrow decreases.
They have another recommendation.
The basic equation of monetarism, which
I have repeatedly mentioned, is the
equation of quantitative theory of money.
So, as I just said, the basic
equation of monetarism is the equation
of quantitative money theory.
Let us look at this
equation again.
Monetaries try to predict the speed
of money circulation.
And they advocate that the money
mass in the economy does not change
arbitrarily by the state from month
to month or from year to year.
More then less.
And that the state, the government, announce
in advance the stable annual growth
of the money mass in the economy,
that the Central Bank, more precisely,
announce the stable annual
growth of the money mass in the economy.
What is this stable growth?
This steady growth should be consistent
with the growth of the
potential GDP.
The potential GDP
increases naturally from year
to year.
Why is?
The population is growing, the accumulated
capital is growing, new technical weights
are being introduced.
And the growth of potential
GDP is 3-5% per year.
What is the role of the state
to adapt to this growth?
Increase the money supply in accordance
with the growth of the
potential GDP.
The central bank
will not hinder the economy.
If the money mass grows at the same
rate as the potential GDP, then the
actual GDP will always be the same
as the potential GDP.
The task of the state is only to announce
once and for all a steady increase
in the annual money supply in accordance
with the growth of the
potential GDP.
The rest will be done by the market.
Prices will be stable.
Thanks for attention.